It looks as though this all starts with 1968. Not only do the new social movements reawaken a sense of social struggle, democracy, etc, which then gets recuperated by the neoliberal project, but 1968 marks the resurgence of Spinoza studies Negri mentions in his introduction to \cite{Negri2020}. In the Canadian context, 1968/69 marks the development (and rejection) of Trudeau/Chretien’s new Indigenous policy enshrined in the White Paper. Reaction to the White Paper spurred pan-Indigenous resistance and forced (according to Coulthard) the Canadian government to adopt a politics of recognition as opposed to assimilation. Trudeau first used the expression “[[just society]]” in the Liberal leadership race of 1968. 

Stuart Hall argues that between 1964 and 1968, the world turned. “It turned, of course, specifically about race. The dream of assimilation of black people to white culture is laid low and interned in the mid-1960s. The black population draws back into its defensive enclaves and, much affected in the 1960s bu the rise of black struggles, especially in the United States, begins to develop a different, distinct and more actively engaged political ideology. But 1968 is also, of course, a cataclysmic year, not only in Britain but elsewhere: in the US, France, Italy, Germany, Japan and Czechoslovakia. It is the period of growing protests against the Vietnam War. It’s the year of the student revolutions, of black power and black separatism, of the cultural underground: of ‘hot’ summers followed by ‘hot’ autumns. It inaugurates, in Britain and elsewhere, a period of profound social, cultural and political polarization. It is when the great consensus of the 1950s and early 1960s comes apart, when the ‘politics of the centre’ dissolves and reveals the contradictions and social antagonisms which are gathering beneath. It is, more specifically, a period in which the state and the dominant classes perceive, not simply what had tended to transit them the 1950s, that is to say the plague of ‘permissiveness’, the loss of traditional standards and landmarks, but something much worse than that - something close to an organized and active conspiracy against the social order.” \citep[149-150]{Hall1978}

Hobsbawm describes 1968 as “not the revolution, and never looked as though it could or would be” because the students on their own could not lead revolutionary masses. Hobsbawm sees the increased prosperity of the trentes glorieuses as making the masses unwilling to revolt. I think he isn’t connecting 1968 with broader political unrest (post-colonial, feminist, civil rights, etc). \citep[298-299]{Hobsbawm1994