The interwar period saw the development of a system of bilateral treaties designed to protect ethnic minority rights and enable the the “national self-determination” enshrined in Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points. As \cite[2]{kymlicka-1995} points out, by 1939 this system had become unworkable, and Hitler was able to invade Poland and Czechoslovakia and annex Austria on the basis of the self-determination of ethnic Germans. The anti-imperial struggles of the 1940s-1960s (India, Algeria, Congo, etc) dovetailed with struggles for individual self-determination in the face of out-of-date establishment cultures in Europe and America. For example, the May 1968 uprisings in France were formed by a combination of new left-wing agitation (students in addition to workers), expressions of radical individual self-determination, and post-colonial immigrant experience, though the relationship between these three dynamics is not as simple as was once believed. As Maud Anne Bracke writes,

	“’1968’, this, meant France’s definite shift to postcoloniality. While de-colonization had started earlier, it was only in 1968 and its aftermath that French society became aware of the *permanent* presence of post-colonial immigrants. ‘1968’ was the opening of the Pandora’s box that contained the complex, explosive cluster of problems related to multicultural society. With their contradictory attitudes, the new left and the student movements in 1968 prefigured the failure of French society and the state in the decades to come, to engage with postcolonial immigrants as at once full and equal members of society and communities with distinct cultures and identities.” \cite[128]{bracke-2009}

David Harvey, in his Brief History of Neoliberalism, marks 1968 not only as the introduction of  postcolonial immigrant multiculturalism in to Western political life, but of the irruption of an individualistic conatus after two-decades of a post-war consensus that required the repression of individual desires for the collective good of the welfare state: “The student movements that swept the world in 1968… were in part animated by the quest for greater freedoms of speech and of personal choice. More generally, these ideals appeal to anyone who values the ability to make decisions for themselves.” \cite[5]{harvey-2005}

Harvey goes on to argue that the explosion of the desire for individual freedom opened the door to neoliberal policies based on radical individualism and free-market fundamentalism, deregulation and privatization, summed up by Margaret Thatcher’s remark that “there’s no such thing as society, there are individual men and women and there are families”. As Stuart Hall remarked about this conjunctural shift, while “the Keynsian welfare state tried to set ‘the common good’ above profitability’, neoliberalism meant that ‘the function of the liberal state should be limited to safeguarding the the conditions in which profitable competition can be pursued without engendering Hobbes’ ‘war of all against all’” \cite[707]{hall-2011}

It was in this context that the 1969 “Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian policy” (known as the White Paper) was released. The White Paper called for the elimination of “Indian Status”, the abolition of the reserve system, and the complete assimilation of Indigenous peoples. In the context of late-1960s post-colonial politics, the White Paper drew widespread condemnation and was withdrawn in 1970. What replaced the assimilationist policy of the Canadian Government, according to Glen Sean Coulthard, was a “politics of recognition” enshrined in the Calder v. British Columbia case of 1973. Calder v. British Columbia was a Supreme Court case which recognized for the first time aboriginal title to land prior to colonization. The case had a profound effect on Indigenous land claims and marked a watershed moment in the development of “recognition” as a mechanism within Canadian politics. 

Additionally, the Canadian government was proud of the multicultural policy it adopted in 1971, there was pushback against it: “The 1990s saw the manifestation of strong opposition to multiculturalism in certain quarters of the public and political spheres, and the drastic shrinking of bureaucratic structures devoted to it. In hindsight, the earlier opposition to multiculturalism by prominent journalists can be viewed as being at least a harbinger of - if not a spur to - the growth in antagonism towards the policy \cite[440]{karim2002}. [[karim-note]] The work on the politics of recognition in the early 1990s was an attempt to save or recuperate the idea of multiculturalism, to put it on a firm philosophical and political foundation.

Following the patriation of the Canadian Constitution in 1982, a round of (failed) constitutional amendments were proposed, the most contentious of which was the recognition of Quebec as a “distinct society”. The politics of recognition, then, formed a way of making sense of settler-colonial relationships both with Indigenous peoples and within the multiculturalism of the settler-colonial powers themselves. With respect to both Indigenous and Quebecois sovereignty, part of the issue rested on the question whether Canada was a “multicultural” society - thereby reducing Indigenous and Quebecois social formations as solely “cultural” - or whether it was “multinational”, and perhaps most importantly whether Canada could accommodate not only cultural and national diversity, but diversity in the mode of production (a challenge posed by Indigenous sovereignty and land claims). The politics of recognition was in one sense proposed to uphold minority collective or group rights, but in other away they were proposed to restrict diversity to the cultural sphere (hence the focus on “multiculturalism” over “multinationalism” and the explicit limiting of diversity to “cultural diversity” and “cultural recognition” in Kymlicka and Tully). In other words, as Coulthard points out, the politics of recognition was intended to save multiculturalism while removing the threat of multinationalism (or alternative modes of production), that is - to use Nancy Fraser’s terms - to engage with affirmative vs. transformational modes of change (i.e. recognition, but not redistribution).

In 1985, the Canadian Government passed the Multiculturalism Act, which enshrined the politics of recognition as it applied to “multicultural heritage” and the “rights of aboriginal peoples of Canada”. 

The Politics of Recognition comes up against a range of problems: the problem of unequal power relations identified by Coulthard, the problem of mode of production (i.e. the limiting of recognition to “culture”) and the when the differences to be recognized are not “cultural” (i.e. race, sexuality, gender, disability, etc). There’s also the problem that “recognition” itself is idealist - it presumes that the mental operation of recognition will be enough to change the material structures of society. So I think there are two main critiques: the individualist critique and the idealist critique. 

<!— References —>

	[#bracke-2009]: Maud Anne Bracke (2009):  _May 1968 and Algerian Immigrants in France: Trajectories of Mobilization and Encounter_, in: 1968 in Retrospect: History, Theory, Alterity, Palgrave Macmillan.
	
	[#coulthard2014]: Glen Sean Coulthard (2014):  _Red Skin White Masks: Rejecting the Colonial Politics of Recognition_, University of Minnesota Press.
	
	[#hall-2011]: Stuart Hall (25):  _The Neo-liberal Revolution_, Cultural Studies, 25, Vol. 6, S. 705-728.
	
	[#harvey-2005]: David Harvey (2005):  _A Brief History of Neoliberalism_, Oxford University Press.
	
	[#karim2002]: Karim H. Karim (2002):  _The Multiculturalism Debate in Canadian Newspapers: The Harbinger of a Political Storm?_, Journal of International Migration and Integration, 2002, Vol. 3, S. 439-455.


