Communitarian-Liberalism Debate
========================

The turn to neoliberalism in the early 1970s came in the wake of a  rejection of a form of welfare-state solidarity that suppressed individual rights and desires. The rising standard of living, education levels, and expansion of cultural life in the late 1960s saw a rebellion against the postwar sense of sublimating individual desires for the common good, a rebellion which culminated in the student-worker protests of 1968. Neoliberal theorists, economists, and politicians were able to turn this explosion of individualism to their own ends, in terms of dismantling the post-war compromise and the structures of the welfare state in favour of the market-driven, consumerist, individualistic “regime of accumulation” of neoliberalism in the 1970s (see Tom Wolfe, “The ‘Me’ Decade and the Third Great Awakening”, 1976). With the elections of Margaret Thatcher in 1979 and Ronald Reagan in 1980 the stage was set for the “culture of narcissism” (Lasch 1979) and the greed of the 1980s satirized by Bret Easton Ellis in American Psycho.
	In political philosophy, John Rawls Theory of Justice (1971) sought a reconciliation of liberty and equality proper to the new conjuncture, while Robert Nozick’s Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) inaugurated an individualistic libertarianism which Charles Taylor called “political atomism”. The culture of narcissism of the 1980s led some critics (Sandel, Taylor) to trace atomistic individualism back to Rawls himself (though Rawls thought that what he was doing provided an alternative to utilitarian and right-wing libertarian perspectives). The communitarian-liberalism debate attempted to restore a sense of the importance of community in social ontology, methodology, and normative conceptions of the social good. While Taylor (2003) has argued that the spectrum from atomism (individualism) to holism (collectivism) takes in far-left socialism and communism, in fact Marxist perspectives tend to be ignores and the debate itself takes place only between different flavours of liberalism, ones which emphasize individualism (perhaps to the exclusion of all else) and ones which take community seriously, though even these “communitarian” perspective continue to be methodologically and ontologically individualistic. (Taylor refers to his own perspective as “individualistic holism”; see also [[joseph-note]] on the ways in which communitarians still hold to an individualistic social ontology).
	It was this debate that led Taylor to develop not only a theory of the self that “included” community (but was not a structuralist theory of social relations, let alone a dialectical one), but also a diagnosis of atomism/narcissism as “the malaise of modernity” and - most significantly in this case - to develop a “politics of recognition” which tried to show how a communitarian politics could be built on top of an “intersubjective” view of self and identity. However, Taylor’s reading of Hegel (on which he bases the politics of recognition) focuses on the confrontation of two equal individuals rather than recognizing (as Hegel does) that individuals are products of the history and social relationships in which they are born. (Indeed, Honneth seems to argue that Hegel’s view was the product of another communitarian-liberal debate in the late 18th century, which makes sense if Rawls was trying to look back to Hume, and Hegel was offering a non-liberal theory of subject- and identity-formation to counter Hume’s (and Kant’s?) individualism). [And of course this fits into Marx’s critiques of “Robinsonades”].
	In political terms, there were two interventions open to the communitarians: a communitarian critique of neoliberalism (i.e. against Thatcher’s “there’s no such thing as society”), though this tended to be taken on by left-wing theorists like Stuart Hall. The other intervention was into the area of minority/groups rights which was especially important in Canada due to [[Canada multiculturalism 1990s]], Indigenous sovereignty, and the problem of Quebec in the post-patriation period (i.e. after 1982). Such interventions by Taylor, Kymlicka, Tully, and others were political crucial in a period of Canadian history in which the multinational/multiethnic/multicultural nature of the polity was trying to be worked out (there is a significance here to it being [[Elijah Harper]] who rejected the Meech Lake accord in 1990).
	Canadian libraries, like the Canadian juridical and constitutional regime itself, embodies this communitarianism and the politics of recognition in a way that the American situation does not. However, American interpretations and justifications of IF are brought into the Canadian context without recognizing this, and so are concerned more with individual rights (IF-absolutism) than collective or communal ones. However, even this is ambiguous, as when Canadian commentators like James Turk admit that one of the goals of IF is social justice rather than individual liberty. (Indeed this ambiguity is there in the American context as well, as with the perennial debates between intellectual freedom and social responsibility - IF is atomism and SR is communitarianism; Canadian librarianship tends to take the SR/communitarian view, but it is ambiguous and complicated). Canada’s adoption of neoliberalism has always been balanced by social responsibility/communitarianism, but this too has been eroded in the last few decades, especially under Stephen Harper’s ministry.