When the report of the Truth and Reconciliation Committee of Canada was released in 2015, one phrase in particular sparked controversy. The effect of the residential school system, the commission wrote, “can best be described as ‘cultural genocide’”. The controversy surrounding the idea of cultural genocide was generally around whether “culture” could be the target of genocidal activities. In many ways, this debate fits within the social divisions between household and polis (Arendt); conceptions of private vs. public vs. state spheres (Habermas); and around the role of the state in guaranteeing bios or zoe (Agamben). But the controversy also fits into longstanding debates around culture and society in Canada, in the areas of multiculturalism, Quebec’s status as a “distinct society”, and the proper relationship between the settler-colonial state and Indigenous peoples (assimilation, recognition, self-determination, etc). The Truth and Reconciliation Commission distinguishes between physical genocide (“the mass killing of the members of a targeted group”), biological genocide (“destruction of the group’s reproductive capacity”) and cultural genocide (“destruction of those structures and practices that allow the group to continue as a group”). The question of cultural vs. physical or biological genocide has a long history in Canada, dating from the introduction of genocide as an international juridical concept in in the 1948 UN Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide based on the work of Polish jurist Raphael Lemkin. However, Andrew Woolford argues that debates over the expression “cultural genocide” in Canada have less to do with its juridical lineage and more to do with current political perspectives on what happened to Indigenous peoples in residential schools. “Cultural genocide” and “ethnocide”, Woolford writes, “are used as qualifiers to describe processes different from and less sever than genocide proper” (Woolford 2009, 82). In this respect, the distinction becomes a political one over the responsibility of the state to protect cultural rights or merely liberal democratic rights. Neither Woolford nor the TRC commission deny that physical and biological genocide also took place, but the Canadian debates have centred around this question of cultural genocide.
	The political theory in question here can be mapped to two competing liberal positions. In his 2014 book Equal Recognition: The Moral Foundations of Minority Rights, Alan Patten distinguishes between a “liberal culturalism” associated with Will Kymlicka and Charles Taylor, among others, and an older liberal tradition associated with John Rawls and including Anthony Appiah (Patten 2014, 4). From the liberal cultural perspective, cultural genocide is genocide, while from the more traditional perspective, “liberalism does not contain grounds for condemning majority nationalism, so long as core liberal principles are respected” (5). As long as the genocide of Indigenous people’s in Canada was “only” cultural, the Canadian government fulfilled its liberal-democratic obligations (we are obviously bracketing here the question of physical and biological genocide).
	The controversy around cultural genocide in the wake of the TRC report suggests that Canadian public opinion also breaks down along liberal-culturalist and traditional lines, and indeed these two perspectives inform library policy and the “core value” of librarianship, intellectual freedom, at least in the Canadian context. There is an uneasy tension within libraries between a liberal-culturalist interpretation of intellectual freedom and traditional interpretation derived from J.S. Mill, Jurgen Habermas, and Rawls. In the American context, underpinned by the liberalism of Jefferson and Madison and given juridical existence in the First Amendment, the traditional liberal interpretation holds sway (it is difficult to imagine the expression “cultural genocide” occurring in an American context). In the Canadian context, libraries tend to hold a liberal-culturalist perspective, with intellectual freedom and community values based on Taylor’s view of the “politics of recognition”, a concept of multiculturalism and settler-Indigenous relations that replaced the earlier, assimilationist model in the 1970s and which became formalized in the 1990s in the context of resurgent Indigenous sovereignty and Quebec nationalism (for example with the Kanesatakeh resistance of 1990 and the Quebec referendum of 1995).

Raphael Lemkin, Axis Rule in Occupied Europe, coins genocide and cultural genocide.
Alan Patten, Equal Recognition: The Moral Foundations of Minority Rights, Princeton University Press. 2014.
