In reading work that centres around the liberalism-communitarian debate, there are two important things to bear in mind. On the one hand, whether the focus is political philosophy or work focused on actual constitutional questions, the work is divorced from the social and political context in which it was written. On the other hand, while the debate is labeled as being between liberalism and communitarianism, it is in reality a debate within liberalism, a debate between an absolute individualist approach, and an approach which moderates its individualism by bringing social relations into the liberal ontology.
	Bearing these two elements in mind, then, it is crucial to bear in mind the transition through which developed capitalism was passing in the late-1960s/early-1970s, i.e. the period in which John Rawls’ Theory of Justice (1971) was written. Rawls attempts to develop a conception of “justice as fairness”, but this attempt is presented as an ahistorical and abstract investigation, to which the social developments are unimportant or irrelevant. However, by placing Rawls’ theory of justice in its context, we can get a better sense of what the book was meant to achieve.
	The world of the 1960s was marked by radical change in society and politics, the most important of which can be described as 1) post-colonialism (Suez, Kenya, Algeria, Vietnam) and attendant immigration from colonized to colonizing countries, resulting in an increase in polyethnic societies (Powell’s “rivers of blood” speech is 1968); 2) rejection of the post-war culture of social solidarity experienced as a repression of individuality (see Marcuse, One-Dimensional Man [1964] and  Eros and Civilization [2nd Edition 1966]) and the development of a counter-culture, issuing in the worker-student revolts of 1968 but also the Woodstock and Altamont music festivals of 1969; and 3) the development of “new social movements”, inspired by the civil rights movement (Selma marches 1965), especially second-wave feminism, but also gay rights (Stonewall 1969) and anti-war movements (first Aldermaston march was 1958). It was in the context of these kinds of social pressures and demands that Rawls sought to construct a theory of justice adequate to the new conjuncture.
	What is important to bear in mind is that these demands for recognition and justice were, in David Harvey’s view, used as justification for the implementation neoliberal policies, focusing on  individualist economic principles (both the individual consumer and the individual entrepreneur become significant figures in the 1970s). Harvey argues that neoliberalism was the (successful) attempt made by capital to win back the share of profits given to labour as part of the post-war consensus. The anti-establishment and in some senses anti-solidarity demands made by various new social identities in the 1960s were reframed as individual concerns (with individual solutions, i.e. consumption) in order to gain support for the neoliberal agenda. Foucault’s work in the late 1970s and early 1980s explores some of these consequences, from governmentality (essentially a consumerist conception of government) to the individual as entrepreneur (e.g. with education as “self-investment). Rawls’ theory of justice offers a radically individualist model of liberal social philosophy in opposition to both utilitarian and intuitionist conceptions of justice, both of which Rawls’ sees as (at least potentially) violating any individualist protection of justice and rights.
	In the years following Rawls’ theory of justice, various critiques of his extreme individualism tried to find a balance between the individual and the various identity groups that had gained significant social and political power by the end of the 1960s. The construction of a liberal theory that would account for both individual rights and the kind of collective or communal demands made by “special interest groups” (the term was coined in 1961, albeit in the context of computing technology) would ensure liberal hegemony over the new conjuncture. The liberal-communitarian debate is therefore an attempt to find an adequate version of liberal political theory for the neoliberal period. This is not to suggest, however, that liberal political theorists were not engaged in a good faith attempt to deal with the changed social picture, but I follow Negri in seeing liberalism as the ideology of capital, and therefore as engaged in attempts to justify and legitimate a capitalist social order.
	In Canada, the social transformations indicated above were joined by two specifically Canadian political issues In 1969, an attempt by the federal government to introduce an explicit policy of assimilation of Indigenous peoples (the 1969 “White Paper”) was met with such resistance that the policy was abandoned in favour of a policy of “recognition” (Coulthard). Nationwide organized Indigenous resistance developed in response to the White Paper, forcing the Canadian government to begin dealing with questions of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis sovereignty. Quebec sovereignty was also a pressing concern, with the 1970s bracketed by the “October crisis” of 1970 and the first Quebec referendum of 1980.
	So, the liberal-communitarian debate took place against a backdrop of major social transformation in developed capitalist countries. In 1978, Ronald Dworkin attempted to shore up the individualist conception of rights and distribution by insisting on a “procedural” theory of equality and equal respect which would not only allow individuals to pursue their own vision of the good irrespective of social or institutional views (i.e. liberal society and the liberal state would remain neutral on such questions), but also ensure equal distribution (of rights) irrespective of the identity, opinions, or orientations of any individual person \citep{Dworkin1978}. Michael Sandel, writing in 1984, challenged this individualist conception by arguing that Dworkin’s proceduralism, embodied in a “procedural republic” in fact exacerbated social isolation and alienation \citep{Sandel1984}. 
	Theobald and Dinkelman, writing in 1995, summed up the liberal-communitarian debate as follows:
	
	\begin{quote}
	
	The chief criticism communitarians aim at the contemporary contours of liberalism is that they have allowed Lockean-inspired possessive individualism to create a cultural focus on the self as the predominant contributing force in identity formation. The emergence of this individualism has come at the expense of the roles hitherto played by factors outside the individual in shaping one’s sense of self. Most notable among these is the role played by community membership, but also important are external factors such as religious ties and connections to the earth. In short, Western liberal culture has produced individuals obsessed with themselves, or with their own rights… In the process… any meaningful sense of communal obligation, responsibility, and tradition has been lost or greatly diminished. \cite[2-3]{TheobaldDinkelman1995}.
	\end{quote}
	
	The communitarian response to individualist liberalism can therefore be seen as a reaction to the corrosive individualism of the neoliberal turn. Having paid no attention to communal or collective (i.e. non-liberal) social theories such those associated with Marxism or feminism, liberalism had to try to find its own way to take social relationships and social construction seriously (at least in part) and to counter the “culture of narcissism” it recognized in the neoliberal culture of the 1970s and 1980s. 
	 Alasdair MacIntyre’s After Virtue (1981) and Sandel’s Liberalism and Limits of Justice (1982)  attempted to bring social relations into the individualist liberal social ontology. Macintyre called the culture of narcissism a “new dark ages” which required “local forms of community within which civility and intellectual and moral life can be sustained” \citep{Macintyre1981}. In his 1993 book, Communitarianism and its critics, Daniel Bell called the line taken by MacIntyre, Sandel, Taylor, and others, as the “communalization of liberalism”. This communalization was long overdue, given that Axel Honneth argued in his book on the politics of recognition that taking social and communal relationships seriously, as against a transcendent or absolute individualism, was precisely Hegel’s project in the early part of his career (the years before the publication of the Phenomenology of Spirit [1807]). The reason for the delayed engagement with the question of community and “constitutive attachments” (Sandel) is that individualistic liberalism of the utilitarian or intuitionist variety had been adequate to the needs of capitalist society (i.e. its social and class relations) until the neoliberal turn in the early 1970s.