Introduction: Fear and Loathing.



	The problem liberal theory of freedom – freedom to choose one’s own intellectual orientation – is that it makes it impossible to think about or understand the ways in which reason itself is formed by society. It makes it impossible to think in terms of trans activist and Seattle University School of Law professor Dean Spade’s particular definition of “subjection”. Subjection, for Spade, “indicates that power relations impact how we know ourselves as subjects through… systems of meaning and control” and how those systems “permeate our lives, our ways of knowing about the world, and our ways of imagining transformation” (Spade 2015, 6). Liberal theories of subjectivity claim that “how we know ourselves as subjects” is a realm of freedom, which “systems of meaning and control” cannot affect. For structural theories of subjectivity, the question is the relationship between “subjectivization” – the unavoidable structuring of individuals by history and social relations and Spade’s subjection. The one is a negotiable, navigable dialectic of freedom and necessity; the other a way of understanding domination. When we talk about the harm done by transphobia, it is in this sense: the shift from subjectivization to subjection, the deformation of “how we know ourselves as subject” by structures and relations of domination. In terms of academic freedom, on the of the main systems of meaning and control is the network and culture of fear which arises out of a condition of marginalization and exploitation. 
In moments of crisis, these systems and structures escape ideological repression and are forced to the surface. showing how the social, political, and economic struggles of the contemporary world are fundamentally intertwined. The COVID-19 epidemic exposes the way ableism structures our social responses to disease (CASDA 2020); “security theatre” in airports, libraries, and liquor stores displays the capitalist world’s disdain for difference and autonomy, especially among marginalized populations; white nationalism plays on fears of “white replacement” just as Donald Trump’s response to COVID-19 plays on fears of foreigners and sickness (Kuo 2020). Fear cuts through reason and rationality – in Rainer Werner Fassbinder’s phrase “fear eats the soul” – and this is why fear is so easy to manipulate, so prone to political control, so ideological. In 2019 and 2020, one of the most widespread intellectual and academic freedom issues in libraries is around trans rights, and this issue, too, is based on fear. Politicized fear – and perhaps this approaches the very definition of the political – is fear of losing power, and the question of power lies at the heart of academic freedom. In this article I want to explore the relations between power, reason, and freedom in the academic context, using the issue of trans rights to connect these seemingly disparate elements.

Since 2016, the issue of trans rights has become central to debates around academic freedom in universities and intellectual freedom or free speech in public libraries. After setting the stage with a brief overview of these debates (Section 1), I will turn to the political history of reason itself (Section 2). It may seem strange to consider reason – often understood as an inherent faculty of human beings – as having a history at all, but I will argue that reason is, in fact, produced by social and historical forces. The history of reason, I will argue, must be understood as bounded by material necessity one side and power imbalances on the other. Once I have laid out the terms of this historical understanding of reason, we can turn to an investigation of the particular kind of reason appropriate to capitalism,  a reason characterized not only by a particular class-perspective, but also by idealism and essentialism, both of which play a crucial role allowing transphobia to be protected by “rational” conceptions of academic freedom (Section 3). An alternative to this capitalist conception of reason and academic freedom is suggested by Antonio Negri’s theory of constituent power, which I will use to suggest aspects of academic freedom which can and should be salvaged in any new or alternative conception (Section 4). I will conclude by bringing the discussion back to concrete question of academic freedom for librarians current on North American campuses today.



