The focus should be on the idea of an autonomous, choosing, enlightened/emancipated individual. This is what underpins free speech, free expression, and individual freedom, and this is what I want to challenge. That “freedom” does not exist in the Taylor’s and Tully’s sense, even the communitarian version in which a society is conducive to freedom. To look at this I can trace the genealogy of freedom from Kant (“what is Enlightenment”) through Rawls, etc…

A genealogy of (intellectual) freedom. 

Rawls states that he is adapting the social contract theory of Locke, Rousseau, and Kant, but not of Hobbes.

For Kant, “freedom” is the basis of the state, and his definition of freedom is “independence from being constrained by another’s choice)”. Therefore, this fits with his conception of enlightenment as emancipation (from tutelage). Freedom is therefore the freedom to choose for oneself, and this conception flows through Rawls into Taylor (see Atomism) and probably Tully. I should check on the Rousseau and Locke versions of social contract theory too. 

Marx’s critique of social contract theory is that it presumes that humans can choose to enter into a society, rather than always-already in society, born into society. Kant’s enlightenment adds another condition - is almost anabaptist, in the sense that you can’t choose until you have become enlightened, but at that point, you are already in the midst of social relations. In any event, in addition to his critique of the Robinsonades, Marx made the point about the weight of  dead generations weighing like a nightmare on the brain of the living: historical necessity. So this raises the question of whether, as social beings involved in chains of historical necessity, education, etc, we are ever free from the constraint of another’s choice. My grandparents chose to immigrate to Canada, therefore the Canadian culture I grew up in is the product of their choice, not mine (for example). 

How would this fit with Tully? The chapter on Arendt’s “agonistic” freedom. 

We could say something about treaty rights, the constitution, etc, as precisely binding on us not by choice. But also the Wittgensteinian language games - if we want to play the games we have to follow the rules. 