Hegel - Phenomenology of Spirit - Introduction.
====================================

Hegel, GWF. The Phenomenology of Spirit. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Hegel begins by taking aim against theories of cognition that see it either as an instrument (by understanding we take hold of something) or as a medium (we understand through cognition). I think this applies both to Kant and to Hume, because Hegel says that the problem with these theories of cognition is that they can lead to total skepticism (which is true of Hume, for sure, in a total sense, but it is also true for Kant in that it requires an unknowable noumenal world separate from the knowable phenomenal world). For Hegel, it is precisely these kinds of theories like this that lend themselves to a metaphysical division in the world, with “the Absolute” on one side and cognition on the other (and if the Absolute is true, then cognition is somehow by definition cut off from truth). Hegel argues that this position doubt and despair (what I would think of as nihilism) subsequently opens up space for Spirit to move beyond such doubt to true knowledge (the “stations” of this movement are the object of the book). Hegel raises an interesting idea, which is that an empiricist like Hume sees skepticism as leaving nothing behind once truth/knowledge has been challenged. Hegel argues that such skeptics mistake the nothingness that is left with a nothingness that must have pre-existed it. In other words, if truth/knowledge are impossible it must be because there is nothing to support them; they are reduced, in a sense, to nothingness. But Hegel challenges this with the idea of “determinate negation”, i.e. a negation which isn’t a reduction to nothin, but if you like a “positive negation” (this is dialectical): “The skepticism that ends up with the bare abstraction of nothingness or emptiness cannot get any further from there, but must wait to see whether something new comes along and what it is, in order to throw it too into the same empty abyss. But when, on the other hand hand, the result is conceived as it is in truth, namely as a determinate negation, a new form has thereby immediately arisen, and in the negation the transition is made through which the progress through the complete series of forms comes about of itself” (51).

This is Hegel’s dialectic. The negation - the antithesis - is not a reduction to nothing, but a positive opposite of the thing, leading to the synthesis, etc, etc. Hegel sees this process as beginning, for knowledge, with the drive to go beyond itself (a drive occasioned by the skepticism, despair, and doubt of Kant and Hume). Once that drive pushes knowledge beyond itself then the dialectical process is set in motion. 

Hegel criticized Kant’s metaphysics distinguishing between the phenomenal and the noumenal. Because if, as Kant argues, all we can know are the (structured) contents of our own minds, then our own minds become themselves become objects of knowledge and subject to the same division; the truth of our minds would only then be grasped as knowledge of the truth (i.e. as mediated or structured by categories). So an infinite regress follows. I find the next part more difficult to follow. Hegel argues that the division between our perception and what we perceive (i.e. between the idea and the truth) are both in fact already within cognition. The thing we are perceiving impresses upon our sense (we have to have an idea of something) and our idea can only conform to the impression we have of the thing. Since the two things and the relationship between them are already in consciousness, Hegel says, “all we have to do is look up” (54). What consciousness does, then, is to determine whether the object of our perception and our idea of that object correspond. This is what Hegel means by “phenomenology”. The phenomenon makes us think about it in a certain way, and that thought (obviously) is in consciousness. How we think about something affects our knowledge of it (obviously), so Hegel is I think confirming Kant’s metaphysics. The process of (dialectical) change by which the object of our perception and our perception of it come to align Hegel calls experience. 

“Consciousness knows something; the object is the essence of the in-itself; but it is also for consciousness the in-itself. This is where the ambiguity of this truth enters. We see that consciousness now has two objects: one is the first in-itself, the second is the being-for-consciousness of this in-itself. The latter appears at first sight to be merely the reflection of consciousness into itself, i.e. what consciousness has in mind, is not an object, but only its knowledge of that first object. But, as was shown previously, the first object, in being known, is altered for consciousness; it ceases to be the in-itself, and becomes something that is the in-itself only for-consciousness. And this then is the True: the being-for-consciousness of this in-itself. Or, in other words, this is the essence, or the object of consciousness. This new object contains the nothingness of the first, it is what experience has made of it.” (55)

So to me this sounds like Kant, as if Hegel is arguing that, while something (noumenal) impinges on our perceptions, it is structured by our categories of thought. However, he is arguing that this process is not static (as in Kant) but dynamic, in that our knowledge of the same object can and does change over time. This dialectical process is the way in which knowledge (truth) eventually is accessed (as Science). This is the point of “Absolute Knowledge” when there is no more division between essence and appearance (as in Kant), but essence and appearance become identical (dialectically subsumed). In this sense, then, it seems as though Hegel is completing Kant’s project rather than superseding it. The stages through which cognition has to pass to move from sense-experience (pure, unstructured empiricism) to absolute knowledge are the stages analyzed in the Phenomenology of Spirit. This aspect of “closure” seems to be most problematic - critical readings like Jameson’s would like to see an more “open” Hegel (non-teleological, anti-“identity”), as opposed to the “totalitarian” closure of the system.

One important corollary to this idea, which has important relevance for the politics of recognition, is that knowledge and its object change over time. So we do not come to a relationship with others with our knowledge already formed, looking only for a recognition which does not change either of us (which is Taylor’s understanding of the master/slave dialectic), but that our experience of the other must change us. Identity itself is historical and experiential, again as opposed to Taylor’s view of the Self. 
