Axel Honneth, The Struggle for Recognition
==============================

Chapter One: Honneth identifies a shift in political thinking from the classical view (Aristotle’s zoon politikon up to Aquinas’ natural law) to a modern individualistic view, beginning with [[Machiavelli]]. (It would be interesting to compare Honneth’s reading of Machiavelli with Negri’s). For Honneth, this shift came about due to the expansion of the world with capitalism - with an expanded view of different societies, people, etc, politics could not concern itself with a a conception of virtue and a set of institutions, practices, and codes to instil and maintain virtue. Honneth argues, instead, that Machiavelli described a situation in which virtue is excluded from consideration and all that is left is struggle between individuals. Later on, Hobbes took this same approach and for both the answer was an authority (the Prince, Leviathan) setting up laws and institutions in order to keep this social conflict in check. Honneth makes the point that “nature” for Hobbes is not a prior state, but is the state that would obtain if power and authority (laws and institutions) were removed from a society. I think from Negri’s perspective this is a misreading of Machiavelli (or perhaps he would argue that the Prince is descriptive while the Discourses is normative). At any rate Honneth claims that Hegel in his Jena period set out to critique this perspective, but did it using Hobbes’ own model (Chapter Two). 

Chapter Two: With Kant, the atomism of classical liberalism achieved an apotheosis, as “practical reason” (ethics) became a purely individual affair (one’s ethical outlook was the product of the exercise of reason to come up with the categorical imperative). Hegel challenged the atomistic perspective which he divided into two kinds: the “empirical” (the kind I’ve been focusing on, in which the individual is fully-formed but enters into social relations after the fact) and the “formal” (Kantian; where egoistic drives determine one’s ethics). Hegel saw the corrosive effects of this atomism and sought to provide a model for an ethical reunification of a society (similar to what is supposed to have existed in the classical period, the polis or civets). In this sense, the communitarian-liberalism debate is a rehash of Hegel’s critique. Where Negri differs from Hegel is that Hegel sees this ethical reunification as possible and good, while for Negri the multitudo resists such a (re)unification.

One of the consequences of the development of capitalism and the atomization of social thinking by Hegel’s time was the inscription of rights as negative liberties (as enshrined, e.g. in the Declaration of the the Rights of Man and of the Citizen). This is really close to what Taylor describes in The Malaise of Modernity. The only way, in Hegel’s view, to overcome the corrosion of individualism (and here is where his idealism comes in) is to restore an ethical unity to the people. 

“Only if the world-historical course of the ‘budding of ethical life’ can be conceived as an interpenetration of socialization and individuation can one assume that the organic coherence of the resulting form of society lies in the intersubjective recognition of the particularity of all individuals.” \cite[16]{honneth-struggle}

What’s interesting about this is that I think it’s in line with Negri’s theory of the multitude. Perhaps what I need to argue is that Taylor/Tully get it wrong, and that rather than Tully’s constitutionalism (like Taylor’s based on an individualist ontology) we can recuperate Hegel’s recognition by adding to it a Negrean constitutionalism. 

“To the degree that a subject knows itself to be recognized by another subject with regard to certain of its [the subject’s] abilities and qualities and is thereby reconciled with the other, a subject always also comes to know its own distinctive identity and thereby comes to be opposed once again to the other as something particular. […] Since, within the framework of an ethically established relationship of mutual recognition, subjects are always learning something more about their particular identity, and since, in each case, it is a new dimension of their selves that they see confirmed thereby, they must once again leave, by means of conflict, the stage of ethical life they have reached, in order to achieve the recognition of a more demanding form of their individuality. In this sense, the movement of recognition that forms the basis of an ethical relationship between subjects consists in a process of alternating stages of reconciliation and conflict.” \cite[16-17]{honneth-struggle}

One of the problems with Taylor’s interpretation of Hegel is that not only does he see identity/subjectivity as prior to social relations, but he sees it as static and unchanging. This goes against Hegel’s view of the mutually transformative aspect of recognition. I think I can argue that the inequality problem Coulthard identifies is better expressed by Negri’s constitutionalism than Tully’s, and also supports Coulthard’s Fanonian conclusion that the response to the non-dialectical situation of constituted power is simply to non-dialectically turn away. So while recognition is dialectic (would Negri recognize this?), constitutional-constituent power is not.