Liberal Individualism
===============

We can see this in social contract theory (Rousseau, Hobbes), and in the ways to try  to overcome individualism (General Will, Leviathan), but for our purposes we can trace its origin to Mill’s On Liberty, where the individual is taken to be both ontologically and methodologically prior, and set up in opposition to social relations he is considered to enter into by his own choice (see also Marx’s critique of Robinsonades in The Poverty of Philosophy and Grundrisse). Modern liberal thinking saw, with the advent of neoliberalism/postmodernism, the corrosive limits of individualism, but could only conceive of a solution along the same terms (communitarianism, individuals deciding on a more collective way of thinking/being). [[Communitarianism]] brings social relations in after the fact, and indeed this informs the politics of recognition and the non-Rawlesian conceptions of minority rights. But it’s still a Robinsonade that has the same problems as Proudhon’s theory of the division of labour which Marx critiques in the Poverty of Philosophy.

Oh, apparently there was an explicit “liberal-communitarian” debate in the mid-1990s. Kymlicka, for example (like Taylor?) is seen as having “rescued” liberalism from “communitarian attack”, though from a Marxist perspective I think communitarian is still just another form of liberalism. [This is probably a good place to start.]

So, one of the strange things for me is that, while “communitarianism” was seen as an attack on liberalism, and as raising new claims to challenge liberalism, in fact this could only be done by completely ignoring the Marxist tradition. It’s almost as if, with the turn to neoliberalism and the collapse of the Soviet Union (== collapse of Marxism), liberal thinkers like Taylor and MacIntyre could now smuggle in watered down ideas of the community. Communitarianism is really a liberal response to the “atomism” that arose with the neoliberal turn (and both the left-wing fragmentary relativism of postmodernism and the libertarianism of Robert Nozick), but it repeats many of the same mistakes that liberalism strictly-defined made and which are subject to Marxist critique. Useful here to think about the way Jameson has formulated cultural logic and mode of production determinations of subjectivity. So, is what I want to do a critique of communitarianism as not going far enough? Is the politics of recognition mainly a communitarian response? I think this is what Patten argues.