Modern librarianship begins in the middle of the 19th century with the establishment of the first tax-supported public libraries in Britain and North America (for example in the Public Library Act of 1850), and tax-supported schools in Canada (Ryerson “Act for Amending the Upper Canada Common School Act of 1846). The textbook view of the development of the modern library posits four main reasons why this took place around 1850: rapid, large-scale economic growth generated great wealth “part of which was available for the support of cultural institutions like libraries”; increased population which “provided an ever-larger audience for libraries”; increased industrialization which “required increasingly sophisticated information sources for its continued development and demanded a more sophisticated level of knowledge among its workers”; and “the democratic cast of American life which encouraged the free flow of information and depended, at least in theory, upon the ‘informed citizen’ as the very foundation of its existence”. \cite[241]{Harris1999}. This perspective associates the rise of modern librarianship with the development of industrial capitalism after 1848, and sets librarians up as intellectuals contributing to this development. However, alternative perspectives - often described as “social control” or “social engineering” - see librarians as contributing to the disciplining of the working class after the revolutions of 1848, and the ideological inculcation of bourgeois values and manners \cite{Black1998, BlackPepperBagshaw2009}. The “social control” perspective describes librarians as filling the ideological role described by Gramsci, in which intellectuals are “the dominant group’s ‘deputies’ exercising the subaltern functions of social hegemony and political government” \cite[12]{Gramsci1971} (see also \cite{Bales2015}.
	Over time, the professional education and training of librarians became more and more separated from the practical, technical work of running libraries, and the field of “library science” (or “library and information studies” [LIS]) was born. LIS as a social science took off in the 1930s under the influence of the University of Chicago Graduate Library School (founded in 1928). In this book I refer to “librarianship” as both the academic discipline of LIS and the practical work of running libraries. The connection between the two is often contentious, with ongoing debates around the depth of connection or relevance between LIS and library work, and whether practice and theory truly inform each other within the profession. A strong link between LIS and library work exists in the form of the American Library Association’s (ALA) accreditation of LIS library schools, and ALA accreditation being necessary for most professional library positions in North America.
	The ALA wields very strong hegemonic power within the profession, despite having no power to sanction libraries or librarians. As the longest-running and largest library professional association in the world it defines the values and sets the terms of librarianship as a whole, both through the accreditation process and through its professional activities. For example, the ALA is the creator and maintainer of the Library Bill of Rights, and occasionally offers interpretation of the Bill of Rights to aid local libraries in setting policy. In 2018 the ALA’s Office of Intellectual Freedom proposed the explicit inclusion of “hate groups” in their interpretation of the Bill of Rights as it applies to room-booking. In principle, this explicit inclusion was meant to insure that American libraries did not contravene the First Amendment of the American constitution, but many ALA members felt that this explicitly condoned hate speech and the perspectives and activities of the hate groups themselves. The inclusion of “hate groups” was eventually reversed, but on many other occasions, the ALA’s interpretation of high-level library policy is directly implemented by many local libraries.
	The same is true for library education and research. The purported “neutrality” of librarianship (especially after the 1930s when LIS fully adopted the model of positivist social science) is enshrined by the ALA and has been the cause of numerous professional and academic debates (see \cite{lewis-2008}). It is this neutrality - especially in the area of intellectual freedom - that allows librarianship to play a hegemonic role in capitalist society, since practical, technical librarianship is seen as value-free objective or agnostic with respect to social and political questions. However, as contemporary critiques of “centrism” and “both-sidesism” have shown, such purported neutrality simply smuggles in the values and perspectives of liberalism, settle-colonialism, and racial capitalism as “common sense”.
	One of the main areas in which the ALA plays a hegemonic role in librarianship, and librarianship plays a hegemonic role in society is around intellectual freedom. [[The Politics of Intellectual Freedom]]

<!— References —>

[#Bales2015]: Stephen Bales (2015):  _The Dialectic of Academic Librarianship: A Critical Approach_, Library Juice Press.

[#BlackPepperBagshaw2009]: Alistair Black, Simon Pepper, and Kaye Bagshaw (2009):  _Books, Buildings, and Social Engineering: Early Public Libraries in Britain from Past to Present_, Routledge.

[#Black1998]: Alistair Black (1998):  _A New History of the English Public Library_, Leicester University Press.

[#Gramsci1971]: Antonio Gramsci (1971):  _Selections from the Prison Diaries_, International Publishers.

[#Harris1999]: Michael H. Harris (1999):  _History of Libraries in the Western World_, Scarecrow Press.

[#lewis-2008]: Alison Lewis (Hrsg.)
 (2008):  _Questioning Library Neutrality: Essays from Progressive Librarian_, Library Juice Press.

