I can’t remember where I read the straightforward account of Negri’s concept of the crisis of humanism, but basically the idea is this: the recovery of the past in the Renaissance led to a new dignity of individual, human subjectivity. Power and activity - history itself - were understood as products of human activity, not of nous or God or logos or anything like that. This has grave political implications, as it challenged the divine order of monarchy, etc. Absolute monarchy and the Baroque (the divine right of kings) was an attempt to foreclose that challenge and essentially end the humanist project, at least as it applied to politics. The Dutch Republic was an anomaly because it did not flee towards absolutism. 

At the beginning of The Savage Anomaly, Negri criticizes genealogies in the history of ideas sense, when what is necessary is the connection of ideas/philosophy with the material history that produced them, understanding philosophy as being produced by particular historical tendencies. This doesn’t mean that there can be only a single philosophy for a given historical moment. Descartes is the bourgeois philosophy of the seventeenth century, one that justifies absolutism as a way to nurture and protect capitalism; Spinoza can be read as an alternative philosophy, one which rejects absolutism in the name of humanist production of history.

This of course fits with Marxism. One of the reasons Marxists can accommodate blindspots or limits in Marx’s own thinking is that we understand that philosophies/ideas exist at the nexus of a historical production. This comes out of Spinoza’s monism: if thought and extension are two modes of the same substance, the philosophy and material life are not reflections of each other, but emanations or expressions of the same underlying reality. There are errors and mistakes, of course; but the solution to them is the same solution as in Spinoza’s ethics: an awareness of reality sub specie aeternitatis that allows us to turn passions into actions.

“Spinoza shows that the history of metaphysics comprehends radical alternatives. Metaphysics, as the highest form of the organization of Modern thought, is not a unitary whole. It comprehends the alternatives that the history of class struggle produces [i.e. proletarian and bourgeois, from-below and from-above]. There exists an ‘other’ history of metaphysics, the blessed history against the damned. And we should not forget that it is still only in the complexity of metaphysics that the Modern age can be read. Consequently, neither skepticism nor cynicism is the positive form of negative thought (of thought that traverses metaphysics to negate it and opens toward the positivity of being). Rather, the positive form of negative thought exists only in the constitutive tension of thought and its capacity to act as a material mediation of the historical activity of the multitude. Constitutive thought possesses the radical character of negation but transforms it and puts it to use by grounding it in real being. In this context the constitutive power of transgression is the Spinozian definition of freedom.” (Negri Savage Anomaly, xix).

I read this as Negri saying that capitalist hegemony instituted a single history of metaphysics (Descartes, Kant, Hegel, etc), which was the philosophy of bourgeois hegemony itself. Meanwhile, there is another history of the class struggle from below (the multitude) beginning with Spinoza. And this is because thought/philosophy mediates between the act of thinking and the real social/historical/economic/political context in which thinking occurs. The “positive form of negative thought” is recognizing this mediation, especially as it applies to one’s own thinking. This could be a solution for nihilism: the recognition of necessity (though not compulsion) in thought itself.

Terrified by the outpouring of human-focused strength that marked the Renaissance, the developing bourgeoisie required a political theory that would justify their self-subjugation to a strong absolutism that would (re-)impose law and order. It is in this sense that Negri calls Hobbes “the Marx of the bourgeoisie”. The war of all against all is how Hobbes interpreted the explosion of humanist strength, and his political theory justified absolute sovereignty to deal with it. To make the Modern world safe for capital.