Notes on Alan Norrie, “Debate Hegel and Bhaskar: Reply to Roberts”, Journal of Critical Realism 12(3): 359-376.

As mentioned in the [[Hegel - General]] note, Jameson and Zizek are brought in as exemplars of the critical (or left, or Marxist) tendency in reading Hegel. However, despite Bhaskar’s engagement with Hegel in his second formulation of Critical Realism (“Dialectical Critical Realism”), neither Jameson nor Bhaskar refer to him. (The works in question are Jameson’s Valences of the Dialectic and The Hegel Variations, and Zizek’s Less than Nothing). This article is a rebuttal of Roberts’ article on “Dialectic and post-Hegelian Dialectic”. According to Norrie, Roberts identifies a trend of continental philosophy inaugurated by Althusser and which sees Spinoza as progenitor of Structuralism and post-Structuralism (i.e. an “Althusserian-Spinozan” tendency). Roberts criticizes this tendency as leading to “weak nihilisms” in the work of e.g. Negri (“weak nihilisms” I think must be code for postmodernist positions) because Spinoza’s “self-generative” activity (causa sui) is deterministic and can’t account for agency or contingency. Roberts wants to place Bhaskar within this tendency, due to his understanding of Marx’s critique of Hegel, that Hegel “destratifies science and dehistoricizes reality”. Roberts claims that Bhaskar wants to re-appropriate Althusserian-Spinozism as part of this project. However, Norrie argues that Bhaskar sees Althusser too as destratifying science and dehistoricizing reality, and that Bhaskar only agrees with Althusser in limited areas (structural causality (see Political Unconscious) and overdetermination). Bhaskar is by no means an Althusserian.

Norrie’s question, then, is where does one situate Bhaskar in contemporary Western philosophy. The original form of critical realism was a critique of Hume and Kant, the subsequent form (dialectical critical realism) was a critique of Hegel from the perspective of Marx and a return to Greek philosophy, all from the perspective of real ontology. Bhaskar “is not properly understood from the point of view of Althusser or Spinoza, or indeed more generally in direct relation to a continental tradition that includes other modern poststructural theorists such as Zizek or Alain Badiou” (362).

Roberts thinks that Bhaskar fundamentally misreads Hegel, because he thinks Bhaskar’s reading is refuted by Jameson’s and Zizek’s. Norrie argues that Jameson in fact isn’t saying what Roberts thinks he’s saying. Jameson reads Hegel not in a one-sided way (either closed, teleological, deterministic, or open, agential, contingent), but dialectically and historically, seeing Hegel’s philosophy as containing both closed and open moments, and as representative of Hegel’s moment in history. “Jameson wants to push, against the evidence as it were, towards the kind of Hegel Roberts would like us to have, a radically open Hegel in which there is never identity or unity” (364), but Jameson sees this as historically produced. Norrie sees both the open and closed reading of Hegel too one-sided, and thinks that the more historical reading of Hegel offered by Jameson (i.e. Hegel as symptomatic of his historical moment) is a better one. This seems to me to be a proper historical materialist position.

[ I like Norrie’s idea (taken from Bhaskar?) of “thrown-ness”, with human beings “thrown” into spatio-temporal existence and social relations. ]

The crux of the debate is over the reading of Hegel and Bhaskar. Because Roberts’ sees Hegel as fundamentally “open”, he sees Bhaskar as fundamentally closed or deterministic, with no room for subjectivity. Norrie argues that Roberts gets Hegel and Bhaskar the wrong way round, that in Hegel openness and contingency are always brought back to order through closure (Jameson’s push for a more open reading of Hegel argues that we should exclude the last two “closure” chapters of PoS from consideration), while “all the concepts of that Bhaskar marshalls to depict the geo-historical thrownness of human being in a world it must work to understand and change are precisely designed to place subjectivity in the real world” (370).

Question for me - how does this question of openness and closure relate to the three “mainstream” readings of Hegel (traditional, Kantian, and post-Kantian)?

Further Reading:

Alan Norrie. 2010. Dialectic and Difference: Dialectical Critical Realism and the Grounds of Justice. London: Routledge.
Alan Norrie. 2012. “Who is ‘The Prince’? Hegel and Marx in Jameson and Bhaskar.” Historical Materialism 20(2): 75-104. 
Robert Pippin. 2012. “Back to Hegel?” Mediations 26(1-2): 7-28.