1. 

Two Canoes, Two Politics

James Tully’s book on modern constitutionalism, Strange Multiplicity (1995), draws inspiration from Bill Reid’s sculpture, The Spirit of Haida Gwaii, seeing in it a “symbol of the age of cultural diversity”. Reid’s sculpture depicts a crew of diverse beings drawn from Haida culture and the encounter with Europeans paddling a canoe, “squabbling and vying for recognition” (24). Tully makes Reid’s crowded canoe a metaphor for the pluralistic societies of what Tully saw in the mid-90s as a “genuinely post-imperial age” (17) after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the apparent triumph of liberal-democratic constitutionalism. The passengers in the canoe are gathered around a central figure, “holding the speaker’s staff in his hand… the chief or exemplar, whose identity… is uncertain” (18). For Tully, the chief’s position is one of mediation or reconciliation, just as liberal philosophy has been, since Locke, one of tolerance, decentralization, pluralism, and the peaceful mediation of competing interests. However, in the twenty-five years since Tully’s book was written, the pacific horizons of liberal constitutionalism have become increasingly fraught. The continuation of settler-colonial violence, not least in the Murdered and Missing Indigenous Women and Girls (MMIWG) crisis in Canada, as well as the resurgence of right-wing fundamentalism, populist governments, the reinstatement of intolerance and oppression based on race, gender, sexuality, class and disability - all in the context of social and economic crisis - all serve to make Tully’s interpretation of Reid’s sculpture problematic. It is hard for us now to take the chief seriously,  “listen[ing] attentively to each [passenger], hoping to guide them to reach an agreement, without imposing a metalanguage or allowing any speaker to set the terms of the discussion” (24) given the very real expressions of government contempt for ordinary citizens, state-capital relationships, racialized and gendered violence, and the differential effects of ongoing capitalist crisis, not excluding the global pandemic of 2020.
In the face of these crises of civil society, it is tempting to reject Tully’s liberal conception of sovereignty and opt instead for a Hobbesian model of bellum omnia contra omnes limited only by the sovereign power of Leviathan. But this choice is a false one, as Hardt and Negri suggest at the beginning of Empire, published five years after Strange Multiplicity in the wake of the 1999 anti-globalization protests. There is a third constitutional option, one which is often dismissed out of hand because, as we will see, it relies upon an immanent, unruly creativity and self-directed activity that is a challenge both to the Lockean and Hobbesian constitutional orders. And just as there is an alternative to Tully’s model of “post-imperial” constitutionalism, so there is an alternative to Reid’s sculpture perhaps more appropriate to our contentious age.
	Kent Monkman is a two-spirit Cree artist, born in Ontario and raised in Winnipeg, Manitoba, a city to which we will have cause to return. Monkman’s paintings have struck a chord with their provocative “reconfigurations” of classical European forms, motifs, and images in the service of “challenging the visual narratives upon which Western expansion and ‘settlement’ by Europeans is historically based” (Elston 2012, 181). Echoing Tully’s understanding of “hidden constitutionalism” surviving within dominating, hegemonic constitutions, Monkman’s work provides “an example of the dynamic, ongoing practice of continued indigeneity within supposedly conquered landscapes”. 
Monkman’s 2019 painting, Resurgence of the People, depicts, like Reid’s sculpture, a crowded canoe, only in this instance Monkman appears to reject Tully’s conciliatory understanding of the politics of recognition in favour of a self-affirmation of the multitude in all its diversity. In Monkman’s canoe, while there is still a central figure, the “passengers” (the term seems inappropriate here) are not gathered around pressing their case for recognition. Rather, the canoe is filled with people of colour of various ages and genders all looking after one another, not in a struggle for recognition, but in mutual support and care, indicating an alternative perspective from Reid’s, and opening up a conception of politics broader than the liberal constitutionalism which is Tully’s focus.
This alternative perspective, a rejection of both Hobbes’ and Locke’s conceptions of sovereignty, is made explicit in the presence of the central figure of Monkman’s painting. Gone is the enigmatic chief who “must act like a mother in caring for the common good if s/he is to secure respect and authority” (Tully 1995, 25). The need to secure respect and authority is a remnant of the false choice, a holdover of the need for constitutional sovereignty and centralization. In Resurgence of the People, Reid’s chief has been replaced by Monkman’s wild and exuberant alter-ego, Miss Chief Eagle Testickle, “a time-traveling, shape-shifting, supernatural being who reverses the colonial gaze to challenge received notions of history and Indigenous peoples” (Monkman n.d.).
While Reid’s chief accords or grants his recognition to the passengers in the canoe, indicating the accommodation of diverse identities in a sovereign constitution, Miss Chief offers her own exuberant affirmation that overflows the limits of the canoe, suggesting an unruly and irrepressible power that does not depend either on recognition or on a constitution. Similarly, the others in the canoe are not looking to Miss Chief for recognition or leadership, but are living their lives, helping each other without concern for constitutional niceties, but all fully aware that they are living in the same boat. While in Reid’s sculpture “the boat goes on forever anchored in the same place” (Tully 1995, 33), betraying the desire of liberal politics for an orderly, predictable, and profitable future, in Monkman’s painting the canoe is thrusting powerfully forward through choppy and uncertain seas. There is an unbridgeable gulf between the self-determining forward motion of Monkman’s canoe, and the static, rockbound violence of settler-colonialism. The resurgence of the people is their unruly momentum, controlled by the determined paddling of Indigenous men and women, unconstrained by the power of a constitution, a momentum that turns away from the white, patriarchal, capitalist state to make its own way in the world. Miss Chief does not need anyone’s recognition; rather, it is the white men stuck on the rock with their weapons who clamour for recognition: of their authority, their power, their capacity for violence.
The new politics of identity differs from the older politics of recognition precisely in this insistence of self-affirmation that transcends a uniform, egalitarian conception of rights and a procedural, discursive conception of democratic process. It takes seriously the incommensurable, the irreconcilable, and the non-dialectical tensions, antagonisms, and contradictions of contemporary social relations. This insistence challenges hegemonic ideas of the state, of democratic participation, of liberty, and of citizenship, all of which play out in current controversies and debates within Canadian librarianship.

[IMG: Kent Monkman’s Resurgence of the People]


2. 

Autonomist Marxism and Radical Democracy


The contours of the alternative suggested by Resurgence of the People are those of radical democracy, particularly in its autonomist rather than its “agonist” or “deliberative” formulations (Dahlberg and Siapera 2007, 8-11). While autonomist Marxism, particularly Italian autonomism, is infused with radical democracy (Virno and Hardt 1996; Virno 2004), perhaps the most sophisticated development of this concept is in the work of Antonio Negri, who unambiguously proclaims that “to speak of constituent power is to speak of democracy” (Negri [1992] 2002, 11). The subtitle of Negri’s book on constituent power, “an essay on the alternatives to modernity” indicates that the radical democracy of the multitude is not simply a way of reforming or reconceptualizing democratic institutions for the current moment, but a complete refoundation of the political possibilities of modernity itself. This is, in fact, the heart of Negri’s project, to reinstate a sense of the horizons lost or foreclosed by liberal constitutionalism - as “bourgeois ideology” - itself. 

References.

Dahlberg, Lincoln and Eugenia Siapera (eds.). 2007. Radical Democracy and the Internet: Interrogating Theory and Practice. London: Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230592469

Elston, M. Melissa. 2012. “Subverting Visual Discourses of Gender and Geography: Kent Monkman’s Revised Iconography of the American West.” Journal of American Culture 35(2): 181-190.

Gonick, Noam, Kent Monkman, and Adrian Stimson. 2009. “Contempt Abo: Two Spirit in Aboriginal Culture.” Canadian Dimension June 30, 2009. https://canadiandimension.com/articles/view/contempo-abo

Monkman, Kent. n.d. “Biography”, Kent Monkman website, www.kentmonkman.com, accessed May 7, 2020. 

Negri, Antonio. 2002. Il potere costituente: Saggio sulle alternative del moderno. Roma: Manifestolibri.

Tully, James. 1995. Strange Multiplicity: Constitutionalism in an Age of Diversity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Virno, Paolo and Michael Hardt. 1996. Radical Thought in Italy: A Potential Politics. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Virno, Paolo. 2004. A Grammar of the Multitude: For an Analysis of Contemporary Forms of Life. Pasadena: Semiotext(e).
