Hegel’s Idealism: The Satisfaction of Self-Consciousness.

Pippin describes the traditional metaphysical view of Hegel, as a kind of theologian, as seeing Hegel as an “inverted Spinozist”, who adopts Spinoza’s monism, but rather than seeing everything as substance, sees everything as subject (mind as opposed to matter), and that instead of the unchanging quality of Spinoza’s nature, Hegel sees this subject as always changing. Pippin argues that this view, with its attendant understanding of the necessity for dialectical logic, is the textbook view of Hegel, and the one that usually springs to mind when Hegel is mentioned, including by Marxist theorists. [4][#pippin-hegel2].

However, Pippin argues that this “metaphysical” Hegel is not the influential Hegel. Those who distrust or are put off by the total system (what Jameson calls “Hegelianism”, similarly to the way Negri distinguishes between Spinoza’s thought and “Spinozism”), have tended to gravitate towards the more tractable edges of Hegel’s work, where his ideas have proved hugely influential (Pippin distinguishes between Hegel’s conclusions and the metaphysical or speculative arguments used to justify them). “Without any systematic attempt to rely on the incredibly opaque details of the Science of Logic to understand Hegel’s full or ‘real’ position, his claims about the historical character of humans spirit, about the social nature of self-consciousness, about the alienation and fragmentation of modern society, about the limitations of the ‘moral point of view,’ about the modern nation state, or even some aspects of his general antifoundationalist holism, can all be discussed more manageably, in their own right, as independently valuable insights” [4][#pippin-hegel2].

Interestingly, Pippin glosses metaphysics as “a priori knowledge of substance”, which I suppose sums up classical metaphysics as well as the more limited metaphysics of Kant. (Reminder that Pippin is one of the post-Kantian Hegelians, who see Hegel as accepting and extending Kant’s critique, and in the end turning it upon itself.

<!— References —>

[#pippin-hegel2]: Robert B. Pippin (1989):  _Hegel's Idealism: The Satisfactions of Self-Consciousness_, Cambridge University Press.
