Rubinelli refers to the “paradox of constitutionalism” (after Loughlin and Walker), which I take to be the same as Negri’s “crisis” (in Insurgencies), that is the fact that popular power is the cause of constitutions and institutions, but is by definition limited by them. Rubinelli quotes Loughlin and Walker: “the power [the people] possess, it would appear, can only be exercised through constitutional forms already established or in the process of being established” (quoted in Rubinelli 2020, 3). For Negri, constituent power is seen as the all-powerful source of laws, norms, constitutions, etc, while being subject to those laws, norms, and constitutions. “Constituent power resists being constitutionalized,” Negri writes, and puts the paradox this way: “democracy is in fact a theory of absolute government, while constitutionalism is a theory of limited government and therefore a practice that limits democracy” (Negri 1999, 2).

Rubinelli identifies three ways to understand (and resolve?) this paradox. The first, which she identifies with Arato, is to deny it altogether, and insist that the paradox rests on a misunderstanding of popular power and constitutions. The second - which I think would include Tully (Rubinelli points to Loughlin and Kalyvas) - “tends to see in constituent power an instrument to reinvigorate the democratic meaning of the principle of popular sovereignty within the constitutional state” (4). The third, which is Negri’s position, sees constituent power as “the power people have to act beyond and against the state”. Rubinelli thinks the problem with these positions is that they conceive of constituent power as the only way to think about popular power. “While contemporary debates focus on the possibility of finding the correct meaning and use of the idea, I was what is the distinct contribution that the notion of constituent power brings to the negotiation and systematization of popular power” (4).

Rubinelli distinguishes between the first two positions, which see constituent power “as a force active within and alongside the state”, as opposed to “radical theorists [like Negri] and public intellectuals [who] tend to see in constituent power a conceptualization of popular power that should not and cannot be institutionalized within the strictures of the constitutional state” (9).