In Canada, the political theory of recognition, minority, and group rights played a significant role in real political debates since the 1970s, but especially in the period of Indigenous resurgence and Quebec nationalism in the early to mid 1990s. As we have seen, the neoliberal turn of the 1970s disposed of the post-war consensus which papered over racial, gender, and class antagonisms in the name of social solidarity. By the late 1960s the question of ethnic minorities in particular returned with a vengeance, in the context of wars of liberation (Algeria, Vietnam), immigration (Enoch Powell’s “Rivers of Blood” speech in 1968), and decolonization more generally. The interwar period had seen the development of a system of bilateral treaties designed to protect ethnic minority rights and enable the the “national self-determination” enshrined in Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points within a system of multiethnic and multinational empires. As \cite[2]{kymlicka-1995} points out, by 1939 this system had become unworkable, and Hitler was able to justify the invasion of Poland and Czechoslovakia and the Austria anschluss on the basis of the self-determination of ethnic Germans (i.e. the “Heim ins Reich” policy). The anti-imperial struggles of the 1940s-1960s (India, Algeria, Kenya, Congo, etc) dovetailed with struggles for individual self-determination in the face of out-of-date establishment cultures in Europe and America. For example, the May 1968 uprisings in France were formed by a combination of new left-wing agitation (students in addition to workers), expressions of radical individual self-determination, and post-colonial immigrant experience, though the relationship between these three dynamics is not as simple as was once believed. As Maud Anne Bracke writes,
\begin{quote}
	“’1968’, this, meant France’s definite shift to postcoloniality. While de-colonization had started earlier, it was only in 1968 and its aftermath that French society became aware of the *permanent* presence of post-colonial immigrants. ‘1968’ was the opening of the Pandora’s box that contained the complex, explosive cluster of problems related to multicultural society. With their contradictory attitudes, the new left and the student movements in 1968 prefigured the failure of French society and the state in the decades to come, to engage with postcolonial immigrants as at once full and equal members of society and communities with distinct cultures and identities.” \citep[128]{bracke-2009}
\end{quote}

It was in this context that the 1969 “Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian policy” (known as the White Paper) was released. The White Paper called for the elimination of “Indian Status”, the abolition of the reserve system, and the cultural and economic assimilation of Indigenous peoples. In the context of late-1960s post-colonial politics, the White Paper drew widespread condemnation and was withdrawn in 1970. What replaced the assimilationist policy of the Canadian Government, according to Glen Sean Coulthard, was a “politics of recognition” enshrined in the Calder v. British Columbia case of 1973. Calder v. British Columbia was a Supreme Court case which recognized for the first time aboriginal title to land prior to colonization. The case had a profound effect on Indigenous land claims and marked a watershed moment in the development of “recognition” as a mechanism within Canadian politics (\citep[37]{Wrightson2017}). 

Additionally, in 1969 and 1971 Pierre Elliot Trudeau announced multiculturalism and bilingualism as the official policy of the Canadian government, mainly as an attempt to respond to increasing tensions between English and French Canada in the wake of the Quiet Revolution (\citep{Belanger2000, Maclure2005}. Opposition to this shift in the Canadian media in the 1970s had, by the 1990s, turned into “strong opposition to multiculturalism in certain quarters of the public and political spheres, and the drastic shrinking of bureaucratic structures devoted to it” (\citep[440]{karim2002}). Given a new round of Indigenous resurgence and Quebec nationalism in the first half of the 1990s, the work on the politics of recognition in that period (e.g. \cite{Taylor1992, kymlicka-1995, tully-strange}) was an attempt to save or recuperate the idea of multiculturalism, to put it on a firm philosophical and political foundation.

[Expand on this and make it clearer for non-Canadians]

Following the patriation of the Canadian Constitution in 1982, a round of (failed) constitutional amendments were proposed, the most contentious of which was the recognition of Quebec as a “distinct society”. In 1985, the Canadian Government passed the Multiculturalism Act, which enshrined the politics of recognition as it applied to “multicultural heritage” and the “rights of aboriginal peoples of Canada”, and struck the Meech Lake (constitutional) Accord in 1987. The Meech Lake Accord would have recognized the “distinct character” of Quebec (and convinced the province to ratify the 1982 province), but was defeated in 1990 when Oji-Cree Member of the Legislative Assembly in Manitoba Elijah Harper raised an eagle feather to indicate his dissent from the Accord, due to the lack of consultation with Indigenous peoples. The defeat of the Meech Lake Accord exposes the tensions within Canadian politics between a hegemonic settler-colonial state, the sovereignty of Indigenous peoples, and the separatist tendencies of English-French relations. Quebec resentment and the lack of Indigenous consultation led directly to both the 1990 Kanehsatà:ke Mohawk resistance and the failed Quebec referendum on Independence in 1995. The political theory of recognition, then, attempted to make sense of settler-colonial relationships both with Indigenous peoples and within the multiculturalism of the settler-colonial powers themselves. With respect to both Indigenous and Quebecois sovereignty, part of the issue rested on the question whether Canada was a “multicultural” society - thereby reducing Indigenous and Quebecois social formations as solely “cultural” - or whether it was “multinational”, and perhaps most importantly whether Canada could accommodate not only cultural and national diversity, but diversity in the mode of production (a challenge posed by Indigenous sovereignty and land claims). The politics of recognition was in one sense proposed to uphold minority collective or group rights, but in other sense attempted to restrict diversity to the cultural sphere (hence the focus on “multiculturalism” over “multinationalism” and the explicit limiting of diversity to “cultural diversity” and “cultural recognition” in Kymlicka and Tully). In other words, as Coulthard points out, the politics of recognition was intended to save multiculturalism while removing the threat of multinationalism (or alternative modes of production), that is - to use Nancy Fraser’s terms - to engage with affirmative vs. transformational modes of social justice (i.e. recognition, but not redistribution) \citep[35-36]{Coulthard2014}, \citep[74]{fraser-honneth}.
In the early to mid 1990s, coming out of the communitarian/liberalism debates of the 1980s,  concerns around what Charles Taylor called the “narcissism” of individualistic neoliberalism provoked a constellation of responses. The  development of communitarian liberalism sought to critique the individualism of classical liberalism and to reinstate a notion of collective responsibility, for example in Taylor’s work on the sources of modern individualism and the role it played in modern society (\cite{taylor-1989, Taylor-1991}). The work done by Will Kymlicka, Charles Taylor, and others to challenge the dominant ways of understanding multiculturalism and minority rights (\cite{kymlicka-citizenship, taylor-1992, honneth-1995, fraser-1997}), as well as the work done by James Tully on constitutionalism and diversity \citep{tully-1995}, sought - explicitly or not - to provide a philosophically grounded political theory to support federal government policy. All of this work not only engaged with the changed nature of multicultural and multinational nation states after the neoliberal turn, but also with the rise of identity-based social movements in the 1960s (and most especially after 1968), and with the end of the threat posed by the Eastern bloc countries which had been conceived as anti-individualistic challengers to liberal individual rights. The collapse of the Soviet Union opened up space for a collectivist critique of the individualism unleashed by neoliberal politics and economics, especially in the acquisitive 1980s. Furthermore, in the Canadian context, renewed Indigenous and Quebecois resistance to Canadian assimilation - the Kanehsatà:ke uprising in 1990 and the referendum on Quebecois independence in 1995 - for example, brought issues of assimilation vs. respect for minority rights very much to the forefront of Canadian cultural and political debates. The work of Kymlicka, Taylor, Tully, and others was an attempt to deal with the new realities of a unipolar, post-colonial, multiethnic and multinational polity. What they had in common was an attempt to update liberal theory to account for the post-welfare state realities of neoliberalism.

