In many ways, the communitarian/liberalism debate simply reproduced Hegel’s critique of atomistic individual social theory from the vantage point of the transition from the post-war compromise to neoliberalism. Communitarians like Taylor, Kymlicka, and to some extent James Tully, recognized the corrosion of society brought about by the “atomism” of individualistic neoliberalism, as well as the challenges to social solidarity necessitated by the struggle of social movements based on allegiances to collectivities different from the nation-state, and so their goal was, like Hegel’s, the achievement of a “natural ethical life” (\citep[102]{Hegel1979}) arising out of a “genuinely free community of living connections” (\citep[145]{Hegel1977}). Like Hegel’s opponents (mainly Kant and Fichte), the communitarian critique of liberalism attempted to show that a natural ethical life could not be predicated on an individualistic social ontology. However, even the communitarian perspective that informs Taylor’s politics of recognition, Kymlicka’s multicultural citizenship, and Tully’s politics of cultural recognition, do not go far enough. They continue to be based on an atomistic individualism, on “the existence of subjects who are isolated from each other” and therefore the communitarian perspective also cannot form the basis of a “condition of ethical unification among people” because the necessary social and communal relationships have to be added to them after the fact (\citep[12]{honneth-struggle}).
I will claim that this mistake is based on a misreading of Hegel on the part of Taylor, who ignores Hegel’s early work on political theory to base his interpretation of Hegel’s theory of recognition solely on a short passage from The Phenomenology of Spirit. Taylor ignores or misunderstand three key aspects of Hegel’s political ontology. The first, as we have seen, is that individual subjects are born into social relations. As Honneth puts it, for Hegel “every philosophical theory of society must proceed not from the acts of isolated subjects ut rather from the framework of ethical bonds, within which subjects always already move” (\citep[14]{honneth-struggle}). The second is that individual identity is static and unchanging, so that the process of recognition becomes no longer (as in Hegel) a dynamic process of change, but merely the social contract rephrased in Hegelian terms. Third is that the subjects involved in the process of recognition are equals. Both the static nature of identity and the presumption of equality (i.e. the evacuation of power differences) is characteristic of the bourgeois ideology that informs liberalism in both its individualistic and communitarian forms.
These three divergences from Hegel’s political philosophy in Taylor’s theory of identity and recognition go on to inform the constitutional theories of Kymlicka and Tully. In Chapter Two I will dig more deeply into Taylor’s theory of the self, community, and recognition, and then show, first, how Honneth’s more sophisticated reading of Hegel undercuts Taylor’s theory, placing Kymlicka and Tully’s constitutional theories in jeopardy, and second, how Hegel’s political theory in fact has more in common with Antonio Negri’s theory of constituent power than is usually allowed. For example, while for Hegel atomistic social ontologies can only conceive of a community “on the abstract model of a ‘unified many’, that is, as a cluster of single subjects, and thus not on the model of an ethical unity”(\citep[12]{honneth-struggle}). While corporate social and political theories try to forge a community under the banner of a single collectivity (nation, or people, for example), the multitudo is, in the words of Paolo Virno , “the form of social and political existence for the many, seen as being many” “without converging into a One” (\citep[21]{Virno2004}). The multitude, for Negri and Virno, is both a “many” composed of individuals, while also being an “ethical unity” of the type envisaged by Hegel.
For Hardt and Negri, the multitude preserves the differences of individual subjects, without forcing them into a unity (“people” or “masses” or even “working class”), and yet managing  “to communicate and act in common while remaining internally different” (\citep[xiv]{HardtNegri2004}). “Insofar as the multitude is neither an identity,” they write, “nor uniform… the internal difference of the multitude must discover the common that allows them to communicate and act together” (citep[xv]{HardtNegri2004}). In Chapter Three we will compare Kymlicka and Tully’s constitutionalism against the “ethical unification of people” and (in Chapter Four) demonstrate how Negri’s theory of the multitude both avoids the pitfalls of the liberal social ontology while also answering the criticisms of the politics of recognition made by Indigenous, Feminist, and Queer critics.

Negri would argue against Hegel that the unity of the people (as multitude) already exists, but it has been fractured and fragmented by the State. Hegel gets it the wrong way round in looking for a way to unify the people.