Singh.

The work of Antonio Negri is rarely considered in terms of concrete political debates and struggles. His work has been described work as “rigorously anti-empirical” (Caffentzis 2013, 74), and as both over-optimistic (as if capitalism had already been defeated) and holding onto an obsolete Leninist orientation around struggle. It is not easy, however, to reconcile the pragmatic, Machiavellian conception of a Leninist politics with a future-oriented optimism that has been described as “passive, even fatalistic” (Callinicos 2006, 151). One of the purposes of this project is to show how Negri’s political theory, far from being so abstract and naïve as to be useless, can be applied to concrete debates within the politics of librarianship. More specifically, I hope to show how the concept of immanence, which is the point of origin of his conception of constituent power, can offer a new perspective on debates around identity politics, recognition, and the mediating role libraries play between the state and civil society.
	The political construction of subaltern identities – their differentiated exploitation and discipline – has been a hallmark of the project of modernity. Silvia Federici, in her account of the witch-hunt and primitive accumulation, has shown that the oppression of women and colonized subjects was not an incidental aspect of the transition from feudalism to capitalism, but was a core part of the process (Federici 2004). Jakeet Singh (2018) draws on the modernity/coloniality research program, which argues that modernity must be understood as “coupled with all that is subalternized by modernity – namely, coloniality” (333). One of the ways in which Negri’s “anti-empirical perspective can be useful is in raising the level of abstraction, not to erase the specificity and difference of particular subaltern struggles, but to allow us to make connections between seemingly incommensurate processes and dynamics. For example, Negri understands the passage to modernity as inaugurated by a recognition of the immanent power of humanity, causing a crisis of authority in the Renaissance and the Early Modern period (this crisis studied in empirical detail by, for example, Federici). The resolution of this crisis saw the reimposition of centralized authority in the form of both the Cartesian soul (over the individual) and the absolute state (over “the people”). We can take Descartes and Hobbes as emblematic of the whole epistemological and political formalization of this process, which was in reality worked out in the breaking of bodies and imposition of new logics and rhythms of work.
	Understanding the inaugural crisis of modernity as cementing a division between the constituent power of workers, women, colonized subjects on the one hand, and the colonized power of the absolutist/mercantile state on the other, allows us to recognize in the crisis the origin of the question of subalternity itself. Over time, as the various “cycles of struggle” around emancipation, suffrage, civil rights, and human rights have developed, the question of the role of constituent and constituted power has become more central. Recently, this question has tended to resolve itself into “from below” and “from above” perspectives “coalescing into relatively distinct theoretical approaches” (Singh 2014, 48). This neat division, while mirroring Negri’s analytical categories of constituent and constituted power, is made problematic by the place of libraries in contemporary polities, the ideology of librarianship compared with the “cultural imperialist” effects of library work, and the fact that dynamics of marginalization and subalternity play significant roles within the profession itself. Many library workers are both “agents of the state” and members of marginalized communities. To argue, as Camfield and Griffiths (2020) do with regard to deplatforming and free speech, that demands for recognition, redistribution, or self-determination “from below” is diametrically opposed to an appeal to state or governmental authorities, risks leaving library workers in a passive, reactive position.
	The concept of a politics of recognition was formalized in the early 1990s, primarily in the work of Honneth (1992) and Taylor (1992). As Coulthard argues, recognition became the dominant way of understanding settler-colonial relations in Canada following the failed assimilationist policy of the 1969 “White Paper”, and before the alternative concept of reconciliation took over in the mid-1990s. Nevertheless, recognition continued to be a significant way of understanding hegemonic/subaltern relationships for the next two decades. Over time, however, the original liberal-democratic formulation has been challenged. Coulthard (2014), following Fanon, argues that the fundamental inequality between the settler state/society and colonized peoples undercuts the Hegelian theory of recognition as based on a mutually recognizing encounter. For Fraser (2003), recognition cannot be separated from redistribution (of opportunity, of wealth, of rights), and Singh (2014), as we have seen, argues that there is not just one politics of recognition, but two. We might provisionally connect “from above” and “from below” forms of recognition with constituted and constituent power, respectively. While Taylor, Kymlicka, Fraser, and others defend a “from above” or “top down” approach to recognition, Singh favours a “from below” approach in which, far from being “an institutional goal to be fought for” recognition becomes “something to be struggled over in any social or political relation” (Singh 2014, 50). By contrast, Coulthard rejects the dialectic of recognition outright, focusing on the affirmative self-recognition of the subaltern subject as the way out of the impasse he sees inherent in the top-down, unequal politics of recognition.
	In the concept of constituent power as the strength of the multitude, Negri not only accommodates the “myriad desires” of individual subjects struggling over recognition within a multitude, which does not tend “to become a totality but, rather, a set of singularities, an open multiplicity” (Negri 1999, 13). He also rejects, like Coulthard, the Hegelian dialectic of recognition (really a dialectic of identity-formation) in favour of an affirmative production of subjectivity out of an always-already [[existing social formation]]. However, Singh’s conception of decentralized struggle over recognition risks losing the sharp antagonism between unequal powers (colonized subject vs. settler state, women vs. patriarchal relations, labour vs. capital), a risk that can be mitigated by bearing in mind the non-dialectical, antagonistic relations between constituent and constituted power in Negri’s theory.
	Besides a theory of identity-formation, recognition also entails a theory of freedom, and it is here that recognition confronts “intellectual freedom”, one of the “core values” of librarianship, and the locus of many of the debates around power and recognition. 


References

Callinicos, Alex. 2006. The Resources of Critique
Camfield, David and Kate Doyle Griffiths. 2020. “Why the Left must Defend Free Speech.” Briarpatch April 27, 2020. https://briarpatchmagazine.com/articles/view/why-the-left-must-defend-free-speech-no-platform
Caffentzis, George. 2013. In Letters of Blood and Fire
Federici, Silvia. 2004. Caliban and the Witch
Singh, Jakeet. 2014. “Recognition and Self-Determination: Approaches from Above and Below.”Recognition versus Self-Determination: Dilemmas of Emancipation, edited by Avigail Eisenberg, Jeremy Webber, Glen Coulthard, and Andrée Boisselle, 47-74. Vancouver: UBC Press.
Singh, Jakeet. 2018. “Decolonizing Radical Democracy.” Contemporary Political Theory 18(3): 331-356.
