Canadian politics can be described as idealistic in both the philosophical and common-sense meanings of the word. Pierre Elliott Trudeau’s inauguration of his “just society” project during the Liberal Party leadership race in 1968 leads inexorably to Justin Trudeau’s promise of “sunny ways” following his election as prime minister in 2015. The Liberals are often seen as “Canada’s Natural Governing Party” at least in part because of their idealism: they manage to navigate the tensions and contradictions of Canadian society better than either the conservatives to the right or the National Democratic Party to the left. But Canadian politics is also idealistic in the philosophical sense, seeing ideas as self-generating and constituting the foundation of the social if not the natural world. For some Canadian political philosophers, like Charles Taylor, the debt to idealism (particularly the work of Hegel) is explicit citep{Meynell2011, Sibley2008}. For others, like James Tully, it is less pronounced. However, Tully’s practice of public philosophy can be understood in Wittgenstein’s terms as “a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of language” (\cite[52]{Wittgenstein2009}, \cite[70]{Tully2008}). 

The goal of public philosophy, for Tully, is to “free ourselves from… the assumption that our way of political life is free and rational only if it is founded on some form of critical reflection” \citep[39]{Tully2008} in order to expose the conventionality of traditional political perspectives and open up a wider horizon of political possibility. But while grounding his critical public philosophy in concrete practices (of thought, language, and action), Tully retains an idealistic commitment. Once freed of our reliance on critical reflection as a transcendental or foundational ground of philosophizing, Tully writes, “we are now able to see the enlightening multiplicity of conceptions of critical reflection available to us” and “to use these reflective concepts as their grammar manifestly guides us in innumerable ways to do: not to provide foundations for, but to reflect critically on our well-trodden ways of thought and action, rendering them less indubitably foundational, and thereby disclosing possibilities of thinking and acting differently” \citep[70]{Tully2008}.

This kind of idealism - the replacement of one set of (erroneous) ideas with better ones - is precisely the idealism of the Young Hegelians Marx and Engels critiqued in The German Ideology. For Marx and Engels, the idealistic view that “the relations of men, all their doings, their fetters and their limitations are products of their consciousness”, emancipatory or progressive philosophy consists simply of exchanging one consciousness for another \citep[36]{MarxEngels1976}. Compare this with Wittgenstein’s insistence that “a picture held us captive” \citep[53]{Wittgenstein2009}. In the Marxist tradition, it is not language or ideas or pictures that hold us captive, but real material relations between human beings that are not contingent but necessary due to the unchangeable nature of history itself.

Indeed, language, ideas, and political philosophy itself, in the Marxist view, are produced by these material and social relations, and this raises the question of Canadian political philosophy to the realities of Canadian politics and history. Can the social philosophy of Taylor and the constitutional theory of Tully be understood in terms not only of responding to particular political challenges (Indigenous and Quebecois sovereignty, for example) - which both Taylor and Tully explicitly recognize - but also as deriving as legitimating the positions and actions taken by the Canadian state?

The political and constitutional problems raised by confederation, and which generations of Liberal politicians have believed could be resolved at the political level, have proven intractable. In September 2020, Sipekne'katik First Nation launched a Mi’kmaq-regulated lobster fishery in Nova Scotia, claiming a treaty right that goes back to the 1760s. Settler-Canadian members of the commercial fishing industry have threatened to pull Mi’kmaq lobster traps (which they consider “illegal” because they aren’t governed by state fishing licenses) leading to confrontations between First Peoples and Settlers, mediated by the RCMP. The RCMP are legally obliged to protect the Mi’kmaq treaty right, but rhetorically side with the Settlers. In a video clip played on Canadian news channels, one RCMP officer is heard explaining to a white fisherman, “whether we like it or not, they’re allowed to go out and fish”. This us vs. them dynamic in Canadian Settler-Colonial society is one of the problems Taylor’s and Tully’s political philosophy sets out to address. But in the thirty years since Taylor’s essay on the politics of recognition appeared, nothing has really changed in terms of relations between the Settler state, Indigenous peoples, and Quebecois nationalists.

The perseverance of these constitutional questions raises a second important question: if Marxism offers an alternative to the idealist philosophy of Canadian liberalism, can historical materialism offer any alternative strategies or proposals which might stand a better chance of achieving something like Trudeau’s “just society”? Tully justifies comparing Wittgenstein and Habermas in part by arguing that “we come to understand some complex work best by comparing its similarities and dissimilarities with another closely related work” \citep[71]{Tully2008}. In this thesis, then, I will explore the questions raised about the connection between Canadian political philosophy and the recent history of Canadian politics by comparing Taylor’s and Tully’s work with that of Antonio Negri.

Negri is of the same generation as Taylor, and their thought is informed by the social and political changes of the 1960s and the 1970s. Both have written in different ways on the effects of the neoliberal turn (Negri from the perspective of autonomist Marxism; Taylor from the perspective of communitarian liberalism), the question of identity and individualism within larger collective structures, and both engage deeply with an earlier political philosopher, sometimes in novel or anomalous ways (Spinoza for Negri; Hegel for Taylor). Tully, on the other hand, shares with Negri a concern for constitutional questions and imperialism, though their approaches differ in radical ways.