One of the core values of Anglo-American librarianship is “intellectual freedom”, framed either in terms of the American Bill of Rights (protected by the First Amendment of the US Constitution) or as a universal human right declared by the United Nations. Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) is “Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers” (UN 1948). The intellectual freedom statement of the Canadian Federation of Library Associations, Canada’s national professional association for librarianship, refers directly to the UN Declaration, as well as to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The CFLA statement states that, in accordance with the Canadian Charter and the UN Declaration, “all persons in Canada have a fundamental right, subject only to the Constitution and the law, to have access to the full range of knowledge, imagination, ideas, and opinion, and to express their thoughts publicly” (CFLA 2019). In addition to laying out the (non-binding) core responsibilities of Canadian libraries, the CFLA statement states that “libraries resist efforts to limit the exercise of these responsibilities while recognizing the right of criticism by individuals and groups”. While the role of the American Bill of Rights is to protect individual rights against the power of the state [look up [[Madison and intellectual freedom]]], the regime set up by the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms is one of balance between individual and social rights. For example, article one states that “The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees the rights and freedoms set out in it subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society”.
	In other words, we can argue that the American context is one of the individualistic liberal tradition of J.S. Mill and John Rawls (see, for example, Hoover’s American Individualism), while the Canadian context is one of a communitarian recognition of the methodological, ontological, and normative value of community. The introduction of an individualistic conception of intellectual freedom into a communitarian regime has caused problems for both critics and defenders of intellectual freedom in Canada, partly due to conceptual confusion, and partly to the very real limits of the communitarian critique of liberalism when it comes to the “resurgence of the people” in the early decades of the 21st century, specifically Indigenous sovereignty, identity politics, and worker’s rights. The shift away from neoliberalism to whatever comes next after the Global Financial Crisis of 2008, the rise of right-wing populism around 2016, and the continuing pressure of climate crisis has replaced the maintenance of liberal-democratic (capitalist) rights with grassroots demands for social justice. These demands, and the incongruous combination of individualistic intellectual freedom and a communitarian political regime, have placed Canadian libraries in a difficult position. Whereas in the United States, the libraries defend and conform to the First Amendment in order to protect their patrons from state constraint on speech, expression, or intellectual activity, in Canada libraries are meant to also protect minority rights against both the state and the majority. Canadian libraries play a fundamentally ambiguous role as state institutions which must uphold the law and the constitution while also protecting individual and minority rights agains the state and the social majority. In other words, while American libraries self-limit their activity by upholding the First Amendment, leaving the individual patron to do as they wish, in Canada, the communitarian position requires that libraries don’t just “get out of the way” but actively defend the rights of minority interests against the majority. A good example of this can be seen in the work Vancouver Public Library had done making connections with the LGBTQIA+ community (in line with their values of “community-led planning” and “community partnerships”), work which was severely undermined by their insistence on renting a room to a transphobic speaking group (in line with “intellectual freedom”).  Defence of room rentals to bigoted individuals or groups in order to give those groups a trusted, socially progressive platform is made in the name of intellectual freedom and the support for minority rights, but goes against the lived-experience and needs of those minority communities. In each case, referral is eventually made to Canadian human rights legislation, which itself embodies a politics of recognition and support for minority rights. 
	
	In some ways, we can see the American situation as adhering closely to an individualistic liberalism in a line from Mill to Rawls - creating its own social and political problems when it comes to Intellectual Freedom - and Canada as adhering more to the communitarian critique of individualistic liberalism. The communitarian/liberal controversy developed in the 1980s and 1990s as thinkers within the liberal tradition challenged the absolute individualism which they saw issuing from John Rawls’ theory of justice. This individualism had become enshrined in the series of structural reforms and cultural shifts we now associate with neoliberalism (and in the cultural sphere, postmodernism [Harvey 1990, Jameson 1991]). Communitarian critics saw the neoliberal shift as indicating a vaporizing of individualism corrosive to the functioning of liberal-democratic states (really, the Welfare State of the postwar period). This individualistic tendency issued in Robert Nozick’s libertarian response to Rawls (Anarchy, State, and Utopia, 1974) which embodied what Charles Taylor criticized as “political atomism”.
	
	The reason - and I guess this would be one of the main claims in this thesis - that IF/SR debates recur periodically is the same reason liberal/communitarian debates recur periodically: there is a dialectical back and forth between individualistic social theories being dominant/hegemonic and communitarian ones. However, because both are forms of liberalism (i.e. both are ontologically and methodologically individualistic and idealistic), neither liberalism nor communitarianism nor anything on that spectrum can get us out of the impasse. What is needed is a fully collective social ontology (i.e. one which takes mutual production of society and individual seriously) with materialism (where do ideas come from? Social relations) in order to move beyond such an impasse in the first place to come up with a new conception of “intellectual freedom” that might inform real library policies geared towards social justice and emancipation, but also more broadly speaking, to challenge the individualism and idealism of liberal-democracy itself.
	
	[Note: the idealism in e.g. Samek is unable to connect the controversies between IF and SR to anything else, whereas in CDDL I connected them to changes in capitalist inflections or regimes of accumulation.]