It looks like both Taylor and Tully have a conception of identity in which not only are practices of subjection imposed on individuals post hoc (Tully follows Foucault in arguing that singularities are not passively acted upon by dynamics of subjection, but are active and knowing participants), but even more crucially that they can achieve a Kantian enlightenment by escaping the constraints of subjectivity (“self-imposed tutelage” or “immaturity”) into a condition of freedom and autonomy (both Tully and Taylor claim this comes about through the ability to think differently, to imagine alternatives). Taylor comes to this via Hegel - think of the path of the Phenomenology of Spirit - while Tully comes to it via Wittgenstein and Foucault. I think that for Negri - eschewing Kant and deriving his position from Spinoza - the act of emancipation does not deliver subjects into a condition of freedom and autonomy but a condition of necessity and community. 

The specifically political problem with this is - to take Tully drawing on Foucault as an example - it limits constitutional participation to those who have achieved enlightenment and maturity. Tully describes Foucault’s “civic responsibility” in Rawlsian terms as aiming to help us imagine how life might go on differently (see also Taylor’s view of free choice - Shoikhedbrod links Rawls’ choice of alternatives to Hayek’s laissez faire), but also “to see if there are citizens who can develop the reasons and will to form a ‘community of action’”. This again gets things the wrong way round from Negri’s perspective: the community of action comes first, whether or not individual subjects have achieved enlightenment - this is the multitude. The “limits” Tully is talking about must then be reconceived as constituted power.

Tully describes Foucault’s work (e.g. Discipline and Punish) as showing the way “our subjectivity is shaped without our being fully aware of it” - this sums up the point of my critique. That somehow subjectivity exists first and then is “shaped”. The Spinozan-Negrean alternative is that the social institutions do not shape some prior, independent subjectivity, but in fact produce it. Tully writes that “A genealogy provides a toolkit for understanding the relations of knowledge, power and ethics in which [individuals] think and act, the contingent and arbitrary aspects of these arrangements, the possibilities of modifying them and the effects of modification in practice”. Tully implies there is no “limit”, and that the relations of knowledge, power and ethics are only contingent and arbitrary, and that subjects could choose to retain any of these arrangement. In other words, political activity - for the communities of action of the enlightened - is absolutely free. This conflicts with the Spinoza-Marx-Negri view that freedom is balanced by a real historical necessity. We can’t simply choose to be anti-racist or post-colonial because we live within non-arbitrary and non-contingent histories of colonialism and racism. Those are non-negotiable, necessary historical facts.

Habermas’ communicative reason/action has the same problem: When Tully writes that “speaker and hearer are placed in a reflective relation of reciprocal obligation”, subjectivity has already been produced. Tully’s (and Habermas’) view is that speaker and hearer already exist when they enter into social relationships of communication. The Spinoza-Marx-Negri view is that people are born into already existing social relationships and so their subjectivity is produced by them. There is no pre-social individual or moment. 

I think this difference of perspective explains the “unreflective” subjectivity (ideology) that most people hold. Otherwise, Foucault/Habermas/Tully/Taylor would have to explain why their view of critical ethos/critical theory seems to abstract and idealized and so far from what we actually see on the ground.