Since the late 1960s, liberal political theory has responded to social, political, and economic change by attempting to tweak its positions while leaving the bedrock (individualism and institutionalism) intact. The upheavals of the 1960s - the civil rights movement, second wave feminism, Stonewall, and the worker-student revolts of 1968 - which led to neoliberalism, forced liberalism to reckon with its absolute individualism - reiterated in John Rawls’ Theory of Justice (1971) - leading to the liberal/communitarian debate of the late 1980s and early 1990s. Communitarianism can be understood as a limited recognition that individual rights are insufficient for a just, liberal society, and that some form of group, collective, or minority rights must also be considered. However, even among communitarians, individual agency and choice remain sacrosanct and individual rights the default position (communal rights are considered a corrective to individual rights rather than having ontological weight of their own).
	Communitarianism was seen as an attempt to counter the “atomism” (Taylor) of the “procedural republic” (Sandel). But in the Canadian context, it led to an attempt to - via the politics of recognition and Tully’s constitutionalism - to deal, on a theoretical basis at least, with multiculturalism, Indigenous sovereignty, and Quebecois exceptionalism. This issue became more acute following the partition of the constitution in 1982, and the subsequent rounds of constitutional amendments which failed precisely because they could not accommodate Indigenous and Quebecois demands. The Canadian social situation became even more complex with the explicit adoption of multiculturalism in 1987. The early 1990s saw a resurgence of Indigenous resistance (Kanehsatake 1990) and Quebec independence agitation (e.g. the referendum of 1995). The work of Taylor, Kymlicka, and Tully were attempts to respond to these challenges while protecting the liberal institutions and universal individual rights of the Canadian polity.
	This “middle ground” is apparent in Charles Taylor’s essay on “atomism”, the absolute individualism he ascribes, for example to Charles Nozick’s libertarianism. Taylor argues that the “free individual of Western civilization” needs that civilization in order to develop that individual freedom (in contrast to Nozick for whom individuals are completely autonomous from any social relations). For Taylor, this condition imposes an obligation to support, protect, and maintain Western (liberal) civilization as well as providing a social basis for individual rights. To liberals and libertarians, this position must appear almost socialist; but Taylor still understands subjects as free individuals capable of autonomous choice and decision, he simply sees social relations as a condition for achieving such individualism. From a properly Marxist perspective, however, and from other social theories which take social structure seriously, the completely free individual capable of autonomous choice does not exist. Society produces subjects, is not merely the condition for individual subjectivity. In no sense can the choices and decisions based on values not merely inculcated in us but produced in us be considered independent or autonomous. As Marx pointed out in The Poverty of Philosophy and the “Introduction” to the Grundrisse the temporal primacy of social relations means that they produce individuals with particular ideas, values, and understanding of the world. 
	We can then understand Taylor’s social theory, and Tully’s constitutionalism (which drew on Taylor’s work) as an attempt to mitigate the absolute individualism of classical liberalism (Rawls, neoliberalism) and libertarianism, by recognizing the necessity of social relations to liberal culture and civilization. But he did not go so far as to recognize that the free individual of liberal civilization does not exist, and so could not engage with the consequences for rights and liberal institutions that position entails.
	The political consequence of Taylor’s view (which we should call individualism rather than out-and-out atomism) is that only some social formations/cultures/civilizations enable people to achieve individualism, freedom, choice. Taylor uses his social theory to argue for the important and primacy of a liberal social order, over for example the communist Chinese order, which in his view, does not enable individuals to achieve freedom and autonomy (i.e. in his view it is only liberal society that allows individuals to achieve freedom and autonomy). However, if we accept the idea that such freedom and autonomy do not exist, then the case for liberal institutions would have to be made on other grounds, and the failures of liberal institutions in the areas of social justice for example, would have to be taken seriously. One reason liberal theorists argue against any form of structuralist or dialectical social theories is that they call into question the unchallengeable primacy of liberal society.