Taylor reads Hegel very differently than Honneth. Where Honneth is concerned to bring out the historicist and culturalist conception of identity in Hegel, Taylor seems to insist on the absolute individualism of classical liberalism, with fully-formed individuals coming-to the master-slave dialectic. I think this fits with Robert Wallace’s characterization of Taylor’s understanding of Hegel as “disastrously mistaken” (Wallace 2005, 122-126). Wallace expands on his critique of Taylor in a blog post. There, Wallace argues that Taylor see individuals as finite “vehicles” for a separate infinity (cosmic spirit, cosmic reason, etc), rather than as seeing the fundamental identity and unity of the finite and the infinite in Hegel. 

Taylor’s description of individual humans as “vehicles” for the embodiment of cosmic “spirit” doesn’t completely misrepresent Hegel, because “spirit” does transcend individual humans, but Taylor’s description does systematically overlook the fact that spirit does this only through the individual’s transcendence of her finite condition in pursuit of her own selfhood and reality—that is, it overlooks the side of Hegel’s true infinity that is critical of a “transcendence” that’s understood as a “power outside” the finite, or as a “beyond.” The key to understanding Hegel’s conception of true infinity in this way is seeing that his critique of Kant and Fichte, for allowing freedom to become mired in “spurious infinity,” overlies a fundamental agreement with Kant and Fichte about the importance of freedom as transcending finitude.
I
n the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Taylor is lumped in with the “traditional metaphysical view” of Hegel, in which “Hegel is seen as offering a metaphysico-religious view of God qua Absolute Spirit, as the ultimate reality that we can come to know through pure thought processes alone”. “The peculiarity of Hegel’s form of idealism, on this account, lies in his idea that the mind of God becomes actual only via its particularization in the minds of “his” finite material creatures.” This conforms to Wallace’s critique, as well as allowing us to understand how and why Taylor can see individuals in a particularly liberal, individualist way. 

Robert Wallace's Critique of Charles Taylor's Interpretation of Hegel, in his _Hegel_ (1975); http://robertmwallace.blogspot.com/2020/05/robert-wallaces-critique-of-charles.html