Tully calls cultural recognition one of the characteristic constitutional problems of the age (an age of cultural diversity). Tully focuses on cultural difference because he presumes that the question raised is one of new or expanded recognition within an already-existing constitution. The questions of Indigenous or Quebecois sovereignty must be limited to “cultural recognition” so that they do not in fact challenge the liberal constitutional order. Feminism, which Tully adduces as a non-cultural example, does require amendment of the constitutional order, but only in a cultural sense, in order to allow for women’s particular modes of speaking and acting.
  Tully thus sidesteps the paradox of constitutionalism that positions constituted power against constituent power. It misrecognizes Indigenous and Quebecois demands for anti-capitalism and sovereignty, and feminist demands for social justice as ones which can and must only take place within the constituted order. The antagonism between the (constituent) power of the people and the need for that power to be “divided, constrained and exercised” through already-existing institutions and forms constitutes the “paradox of constitutionalism”. This paradox is repressed in the Canadian context (which is why Canadian constitutional reform can never resolve the Indigenous and Quebecois questions).
   These constitutional problems never go away, but they always appear new. Tully writes of the “new” multiculturalism and diversity of states I the mid-90s, while Loughlin and Walker describe the “revival of ethnic and otherwise exclusionary forms of nationalism; the nurturing of a more localized politics of identity leading to the formation political communities below the level of the nation state” as well as supra-national organizations which do not fit within the liberal-democratic nation-state constitutional order. These issues reach back, however, to the post-colonialism and subaltern demands for a new order in the late 1960s, and continue into persont day controversies around free expression, cancel culture, race-, gender- and sexuality-based violence, refugee and immigration fears, and the rise of right-wing populism.