The contemporary discourse of recognition is deeply marked by its formalization in the period immediately following the collapse of the Soviet Union, with the attendant triumphalist capitalism and the “end of ideology”. The rhetorical move from a “politics of recognition” (Taylor 1992) to a “politics of cultural recognition” (Tully 1995) is significant. The end of any serious challenge (even if only symbolic) to the capitalist order means that for Tully, there can be no real alternative to capitalist politics and economics, and that class struggle can usefully be evacuated from political considerations in favour of a “struggle for recognition” (Honneth 1992/1995). Indeed, it is hard to imagine how class struggle, labour-capital relationships, and the capitalist class system could be mapped to a theory of cultural recognition. The distinctions between bourgeoisie and worker are not really comprehended by the idea of cultural difference: while there are forms of bourgeois and worker culture, they cannot really be understood as “different” cultures in the way that, say, white, patriarchal, consumer culture and the traditional culture of the Dene are different.
	Nancy Fraser, in her 1996 book Justice Interruptus argued that by the mid090s, “cultural recognition displaces socioeconomic distribution as the remedy for injustice and the goal of political struggle” (Fraser 1996, 11). But the evacuation of class and economic antagonisms is not an accident, rather it is a key step in the recuperation of constitutional politics in the face of the challenges of (cultural) recognition. If a politics of recognition can “accommodate” the various demands for recognition of varied cultural groups, then it can maintain the material bases – the economic relationships – intact. Indeed, the exclusion of economic relations is an indication of the incommensurability of the bourgeois-liberal constitutional order and non-capitalist economics.
	In 2003, Nancy Fraser could claim that “economic transformation is out of fashion” (p. 75), but that nevertheless “it is a mistake to think we should drop the idea of deep economic restructuring”. Fraser’s insistence that recognition cannot be divorced from redistribution is part of a tendency of critique of the liberal conception of recognition as it was first formalized in the early-mid 1990s. 


Do any of these theorists talk about alienation/ideology? When Honneth talks about everyday injustices like humiliation, surely alienation must fit in there (the threefold alienation Marx talks about); and in terms of “self-recognition”, doesn’t this imply some non-ideological form of self-understanding and knowledge?

Tully on “custom”: 87-91.

If there’s a connection from Honneth/Taylor through e.g. Coulthard to Negri’s Savage Anomaly, then there is another route from Taylor/Tully to Negri’s Potere constituente. Tully’s “hidden constitutionalism” is similar to Negri’s constituent power, but I suspect “modern constitutionalism” is not the same category as “constituted power”.  One of the ways they differ, I think is that constitutionalism sees power as actually vested in government, while constituted power includes power relations which are not part of “the state” narrowly defined. Is there something here about the expansion of political power outside the state which equates to the expansion of “proletarian” outside the working class and factory-logic outside the factory? 

[[Tully - Strange Multiplicities]]
[[Tully - Public Philosophy in a New Key]]
