Tully is clearly interested in “constituent power”, but he does not explicitly situate himself within that history. Perhaps this is because of his denial of a question of power (it will be interesting to read his use of Foucault - when power is everywhere it is nowhere). Tully writes, in the introduction to Public Philosophy in a New Key that there are four external “conditions of possibility” for democratic activity, one of which is “causal processes of historical development”. Tully writes that rather than being “external” to the demos in any real way, “each of the four conditions of possibility is shown to be internally related to and reciprocally shaped by the every day activities of democratic citizens, not separate from and determinative of their field of freedom”. This isn’t a particularly novel insight (it basically restates Marx’s historical materialist thesis) *but* it sneaks in particular liberal conceptions of democracy and freedom (i.e. an absolute freedom). “It is this revolutionary discovery that brings political philosophy ‘down’ into the world of the demos and renders it a situated public philosophy in conversation with fellow citizens. Equally important, it enables us to see that we are much freer and our problems more tractable than the grand theories of the four pillars make it seem. For while we are still entangled in conditions that constrain and enable, and are difficult to challenge, we are no longer entrapped in background conditions that determine the limits of our foreground activities, for none is permanently off limits” \citep[9]{Tully2008).

This connects up with what I want to talk about with respect to freedom and necessity. Human beings obviously are faced with limits on what is possible - the necessary - but also faced with questions of power - compulsion [Spinoza E1D7]. And the compulsion of constituted powers is not democratic. Tully seems to define “democracy” and “citizenship” so broadly that nothing is not-democratic, even the unjust, coercive politics of tyranny (to take the argument to its conclusion). I suspect, as I say, that he’s under Foucault’s sway here, but this sets up nicely for a confrontation with Negri. 

Tully still sees people as not produced by social and historical necessity, but constrained externally by them. “The arbitrary and unnecessary limits to the ways they are constrained to think, deliberate, and act”. This presumes that there is some kind of intellectual freedom outside of history and social relationships that are then deformed or constrained. The Marxist-Spinozan-Negrean view is that our ideas are produced by the social and historical relationships that pre-exist us; there are limits which may once have been contingent but by the time we are born are necessary. Take something like “surveillance” or “racism” for example. We are not free to not be structured by those two things right now. They are not unnecessary limits, but necessary ones. Similarly, while cultural recognition can lead to changes in accommodations, there are necessary limits: the capitalist Canadian society cannot “allow” the co-existence of a non-capitalist mode of production (Indigenous ways of living). That isn’t contingency, it is compulsion.

Tully derives a lot of his method from the later [[Wittgenstein]] of the Philosophical Investigations.