There are times I agree with Wittgenstein (at least as described/used by Tully, but I feel like historical materialism also takes Wittgenstein into account. Or perhaps it is better to say: a materialist Wittgenstein would be on the money. But Wittgenstein is, at bottom, just as much of an idealist as the Young Hegelians. Tully writes “To guard against the conservative interpretation of this point [that below reasons is not a grounded proposition, but an ungrounded action], which is often mistakenly attributed to Wittgenstein, we need only recall that what holds the conventions of a language game in place is just our continuing to speak and act in conventional ways” (53). If this was the case, then social change/emancipation would simply require speaking and acting in different ways. But to historical materialists, “continuing to speak and act in conventional ways” is a function of the mode and relations of production. Edward Said, who Tully refers to, speaks about how particular things like the West Indian plantations in Mansfield Park are made possible by the existence and importance to British capital of West Indian plantations and not, say, Alaskan seal farms. Jane Austen could not have simply “chosen” to change West Indian plantations to Alaskan seal farms, because British capital produced both the plantations and her novel (and indeed, her). (I say “produced” rather than “determined” here to align more closely with Negri/Spinoza - there is an ontological requirement; what is in Nature (or in the mode of production) produces its effects, including its conventional linguistic effects and ideas). I guess I would argue that Wittgenstein sees an “ungrounded way of acting” as sui generis or free (if not “understood”) choice, when what a Marxist would argue is that the “ungrounded” way of acting in fact does have a ground, just not a discursive or intellectual one: the mode of production and its social relations. This is a grounding in material power (and not the decentralized power of Tully/Foucault, but concentrated class power). My “ungrounded way of acting” is likely grounded in my property relations. I act a certain way because I have no property but my labour-power to sell.

I suppose the activity I’m engaged in here is actually what Tully’s public philosophy is after: the unsettling of the hegemonic forms of words and ways of understanding e.g. intellectual freedom within librarianship. I still think there’s too much idealism and presumption of absolute freedom, but I think I begin to see Wittgenstein and Tully’s point… 

Taylor also uses Wittgenstein (cf To Follow a Rule). And both of Taylor and Tully use him in the same way: to bring in the kind of social background idea that is already in Marx and Marxism. He forms an alternative to the dominant moral and constitutional traditions for both of them.

Wittgenstein actually has serious consequences for intellectual freedom: if there is no truth-ground, and if finding out *more* reasons, explanations won’t get us any closer to a truth-ground, then, as he says we have stop talking and start doing, which is what I’ve been calling “commitment”.